European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
Available online 18 July 2024
0014-2921/©
2024
The
Author(s).
Published
by
Elsevier
B.V.
This
is
an
open
access
article
under
the
CC
BY
license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
European Economic Review
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/eer
Do governments crowd out governments? Evidence from a natural
experiment✩
Stuart Baumann a, Margaryta Klymak b,∗
a Independent Researcher
b King’s College London, United Kingdom
A R T I C L E
I N F O
JEL classification:
H50
H61
Keywords:
Government spending
Embassies
Fiscal year-end
A B S T R A C T
Many governments operate budgets that expire at the end of the fiscal year and rush to spend
large amounts at this time. The scale and breadth of this heightened spending raises the
possibility of government departments crowding out each other at the year-end while competing
with one another for limited suppliers. This may exacerbate the extent of year-end spending
spikes. We investigate this possibility using expenditures of all overseas embassies and offices
of the UK. We leverage a unique setting where embassies share the UK fiscal year for their
budgeting but operate in countries with varying fiscal years. Our results show that: (1) in every
country embassies spend more at the UK fiscal year-end than in the average month; (2) the
extent of this extra spending is greater in countries that have a fiscal year that overlaps with
the UK; (3) embassies spend more at the end of the fiscal years of local firms.
1. Introduction
Governments around the world typically operate under annually expiring budgets and spend substantially more at the end of
the fiscal year than at any other time. This pattern has been observed in the United States (Liebman and Mahoney, 2017), the
United Kingdom (Baumann, 2019) and across 27 OECD countries (Eichenauer, 2020). The size of this effect can be substantial. For
instance, in the United Kingdom capital expenditure in the last month of the fiscal year is about twice as much as in the average
month (Baumann, 2019), and the United States Government spends 4.9 times more in the last week of the fiscal year compared to the
average week (Liebman and Mahoney, 2017). This phenomenon has recently attracted the attention of economists and policymakers
due to the potential for waste.1
Many government departments simultaneously spending at high levels can have congestion effects in the economy. Specifically,
this simultaneous spending can cause the crowding out of suppliers, which can impact government departments in a number of ways.
First, government suppliers may raise their prices due to high demand Klymak and Baumann (2022).2 If the quantity demanded is
✩We thank the UK government for sharing the data with us. Daniel Schaefer, Carl Singleton, Simon Quinn, Fabrizio Santoro and Mishel Ghassibe provided
useful comments. All errors are our own.
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses:
stuart@stuartbaumann.com (S. Baumann), margaryta.klymak@kcl.ac.uk (M. Klymak).
1 For instance, drawing on United States Government IT procurement data, Liebman and Mahoney (2017) found that projects commissioned at the end of
the fiscal year were 2.2 to 5.6 times more likely to receive a ‘‘low quality’’ score.
2 Based on Ukrainian government procurement auctions, Klymak and Baumann (2022) showed that firms charged significantly higher margins at the end of
the fiscal year relative to other times of the year. There is also anecdotal evidence for price increases at year end in the UK from Hyndman et al. (2007, page
227). Specifically, an interview in the paper states ‘‘you do [end up paying over the odds for spending to get rid of money at short notice]. There’re two things —
there are those [contractors] on our select list who have given us prices ... but you find in some years that none of them is willing to do it, as they are all fully committed
and you end up paying over the odds (Interview K)’’.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroecorev.2024.104803
Received 16 July 2023; Received in revised form 30 June 2024; Accepted 4 July 2024


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
2
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
relatively inelastic to price increases this could result in bigger spending spikes. Second, due to supplier unavailability, government
departments may also have to change the goods they buy or the suppliers they buy from Hyndman et al. (2007). If the department
faces switching costs or if the substitute goods/suppliers are less economical then this will further increase year-end spending.
Substitute goods may also be higher quality and hence more costly than they would be at other times of the year.34 Third, suppliers
may hire more salespeople and change their good offerings at year-end to exploit a higher willingness to spend and induce greater
spending. Salespeople may also intensify promotional campaigns and offer value-added services amidst heightened competition for
government contracts.5 To the extent these efforts are successful we would expect higher spending at year-end. Fourth, departments
may buy fewer items than they otherwise would as they move some expenditures to other times of the year to avoid price increases
or supplier unavailability. The first three of these mechanisms suggest higher spending at the end of the local fiscal year while the
fourth suggests lower spending at year-end.
We study the impact of these crowding out effects on the sizes of observed year-end spending spikes. The identification challenge
we face is to disentangle the impact of a department’s fiscal year away from the impact of the fiscal years of other government
agencies in the economy. Most government entities in a country operate under the same fiscal year rules, so the budgetary fiscal
year for a department is the same as for all government departments operating in that economy. To overcome this, we analyse
the purchasing decisions of all United Kingdom’s (‘‘home’’) foreign office’s embassies, high commissions,6 consulates, missions and
other offices (henceforth simply ‘‘overseas offices’’) that are located outside of the UK (in ‘‘host’’ countries) over the period from
2008–2019. This setting is ideal to study our question as all overseas offices are operating under the home fiscal year but are
located in countries with different fiscal year cycles which may or may not overlap with home.7 Thus the novelty of our study is
that we can disentangle an individual government’s year-end spending behaviour from the competition they face from other the
spending of other government departments at the year-end.8 Furthermore, our dataset covers a substantial number of countries as
the UK has a large network of overseas offices to support its foreign policy. According to the latest ranking of the Lowy Institute,
the UK was ranked as having the 11th highest level of international diplomatic engagement (Lowy Institute, 2019).
We find that overseas offices on average spend more at the end of the UK fiscal year in March than in other months and we
observe this pattern in all countries. Fiscal year-end spending is greater in countries that share a fiscal year with the UK. This finding
is consistent with a crowding out effect coming from the year-end spending of the host government. Our results imply that greater
spending in the economy can fuel even greater spending and in that sense, there is a multiplier effect on year-end spending coming
from all government departments spending at the same time.9
As a secondary aim we investigate the extent to which the fiscal years of firms in the local economy can influence year-end
spending. One mechanism through which this can occur is that salespeople in supplier firms may attempt to move sales between
fiscal years to maximise their commissions, given targets in their incentive structure (Oyer, 1998). This can be a sizable effect, Price
Waterhouse Coopers (2023) suggests that one reason firms may want to change their fiscal year is to avoid year-end coinciding with
that of other firms. They state that ‘‘Moving sales targets to a non-calendar year-end may reduce pricing pressures or resource constraints
at customers that are typically driven by high volumes of vendors seeking to meet sales targets at the same time’’.10 Therefore in certain
settings, we might expect higher spending right before the end of the firm fiscal year as accelerated sales are moved to these times.
There is some evidence of increased advertising at year-end with Décaire and Sosyura (2022) using data on the adverting budgets of
US firms to find that managers with surplus funds rush to spend before their budget would expire. More generally previous studies
have highlighted the importance of fiscal year-end of firms in various other ways. It has been found that firms at the year-end
strategically time investments to reduce taxes (Kinney and Trezevant, 1993); undertake more capital investments (Shin and Kim,
2002); report lower working capital to signal greater efficiency (Frankel et al., 2017); strategically time asset sales as a low cost
way to alter earnings (Bartov, 1993); and produce in excess to lower the reported cost of goods sold (Roychowdhury, 2006).
While there is not in general one fiscal year used by all firms in any given country,11 there is often rough alignment in the fiscal
year choices of each firm in a country. This alignment varies between countries and we exploit this variation to estimate the effect
of a firm fiscal year on the spending patterns of overseas offices at the year-end. We find that overseas office spending increases
later in the fiscal years of local firms.
3 Note that while Liebman and Mahoney (2017) found that IT projects delivered at year-end are of lower quality than other spending (in terms of delivering
value for taxpayers), this does not imply that the specific items being bought are of lower quality.
4 This substitution may be more likely for types of procurements that deliver personal utility for the public sector workers. As an example a
recent (OpenTheBooks.com, 2019) report found that in September 2018 US government departments spent $4.6 million on lobster. This may be higher quality
catering (and at higher cost) than the department normally consumes.
5 Some trade exhibitions, for instance the annual ‘‘Warrior Expo’’ in the defence procurement industry, are strategically scheduled to coincide with the
spending increase at the end of the U.S. government’s fiscal year (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2011).
6 The United Kingdom, as well as other commonwealth countries, have a naming convention of calling the principal diplomatic mission to other commonwealth
countries a ‘‘High Commission’’ rather than an embassy.
7 We examine how the local fiscal year-end affects the spending of each overseas office. While the scale of spending of an overseas office will generally
be small in relation to their local economy, the spending of the host government will be significantly larger. We ascertain the crowding out effect of this host
government’s spending on the overseas office’s spending patterns.
8 We will disentangle a further mechanism of overlapping firms’ fiscal year-ends.
9 More generally however our setting is an ideal one to study the extent to which government agencies crowd out other government agencies in the economy.
Similar crowding out is also likely to occur at other times of heightened spending such as when there is an expansionist fiscal policy. The spending response of
embassies, which do not have the same fiscal year as other governmental agencies in their local economy, provides a view on the extent of this crowding out.
10 In certain countries (such as Australia) retailers advertise ‘‘year-end sales’’ with the ostensible goal to reduce inventory before the end of the fiscal year.
11 For some countries, firms typically align with the national governmental fiscal year (e.g. Australia) while in other countries (e.g. the USA) they do not.


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
3
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Our findings contribute to the year-end spending literature, which has primarily attributed this behaviour to the budgeting
of government departments at the fiscal year-end (i.e. internal factors) rather than external factors (e.g. spending of external
government departments). Specifically, Liebman and Mahoney (2017) suggest that government departments build up precautionary
savings funds which they expend at year-end when funds would otherwise expire. As they cannot roll over funds into the following
fiscal year, these departments spend the remaining amount at the end of the year. Baumann (2019) suggested that the behaviour
was motivated by procrastination on the part of government departments. Eichenauer (2020) proposed that year-end spending is
a result of government departments being unable to effectively plan ahead. These explanations agree on spending being driven by
a government department’s internal budgetary and reporting fiscal year and neither paper considers the impact of other agents
in the economy (including other government departments) having their end of fiscal year at the same time.12 Our paper is the
first to separate the impact of internal from external factors. We also find support for the importance of internal factors in driving
end-of-year spending. Furthermore, our paper presents the novel finding that two external channels can influence year-end spending:
the impact of the fiscal years of other government departments and of firms that operate in the same economy.
Finally, our paper is also related to work examining fiscal spillovers focusing on the impact of the spending decisions of
one jurisdiction on the decisions of another. Various types of strategic interactions between the fiscal and spending policies of
neighbouring governments have been studied, including yardstick competition (Besley and Case, 1995), tax competition (Devereux
et al., 2008; Parchet, 2019) and spending spillovers on other jurisdictions (Case et al., 1993; Baicker, 2005). In our paper we find
an additional spillover: year-end spending of one government department can impact the year-end spending of another. We find
this in the context of UK embassies being impacted by the spending of their host country.
There are three main implications of this short paper. First, the home fiscal year is the most important for the pattern of spending
over the year. This finding confirms that the focus of the literature on the role of the budgetary fiscal year in explaining year-end
spending spikes. Second, the size of year-end spending is larger in countries that have overlapping fiscal years with home. This
indicates that congestion effects exacerbate year-end spending. Third, home government spending is higher later in the fiscal year
of local firms.
2. Methodology
2.1. Data
We use a monthly spending dataset covering the spending of the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office between the 2008–2009
and 2018–2019 fiscal years. There are two budgets for each overseas office and year.13 The first is the resource budget, which is
used for regular expenses such as stationery, staff training, diplomatic events, salaries and rent. The second is the capital budget,
which is for office renovations, office furniture, new computers and other capital purchases.
For each overseas office, we have one observation for each budget, each month and each year (i.e. overseas office-budget-
month-year). Overall we rely on an unbalanced panel of 399 overseas offices, located over 180 countries, resulting in 4932 overseas
office-budget-years.14 The majority of offices are located in countries operating under a calendar year fiscal year. This can be seen
in the top panel of Fig. 1. We do however have many office-budget-years with different fiscal year-ends, with 16% of countries (and
65 overseas offices) sharing the same fiscal year-end with the UK in March.
Overseas offices in our sample tend to spend at very different scales.15 On one end is the Kabul Embassy, which spent more than
100 million pounds in each fiscal year between 2015–2016 and 2018–2019. On the other extreme, there are many small offices,
such as the embassy in Minsk where annual expenditures are around one million pounds per year. While our data is at an overseas
office level, we also aggregate spending levels at a country level and present it in the middle panel of Fig. 1.16 Finally, the bottom
panel of Fig. 1 presents home year-end capital expenditure for each country divided by the monthly average for overseas offices
in that country. For example, a value of two for this ratio means the office is spending twice as much in March as in the average
month. It shows that overseas offices spend more at the end of the UK fiscal year in every country.
Several embassies in our data sold some assets and obtained revenues from the asset sales. Under the accounting conventions in
place, these were recorded as negative expenditures. As a result, some months have negative total expenditures for some departments
12 In the appendix of this paper, we extend previous models of Liebman and Mahoney (2017) and Baumann (2019) to explore their implications for how
crowding out of suppliers can affect year-end spending spikes. We find that crowding out should reduce the size of spending spikes seen in practice as it is a
mechanism which encourages departments to more evenly spread out spending throughout the year.
13 United Kingdom departments have a limited ability to ‘‘rollover’’ funds between fiscal years. Prior to the 2010–2011 fiscal year, this ability to rollover
was allowed under the ‘‘end of year flexibility’’ scheme which allowed UK departments to save unlimited funds between years. From the 2011–2012 fiscal year
and onwards however the new ‘‘Budget Exchange System’’ was far more restrictive. Specifically, departments could only rollover funds up to a limit of between
0.75% and 4% (depending on the department). In addition, funds could only be rolled over for one additional year. Evidence related in Crawford et al. (2009)
and Baumann (2019) suggests that the UK year-end spending remained large despite the ability to save between years.
14 This number is lower than the number of offices multiplied by ten years and two budgets per department, reflecting that some overseas offices did not
exist for all ten years. We deflate the spending data with a monthly consumer price index obtained from the UK’s Office for National Statistics. We use this
rather than host country inflation rates as budgets for overseas offices are denominated in pounds and are typically only exchanged for local currency at the
time spending occurs. While UK departments are allowed to use derivatives to hedge against exchange rate exposure, the foreign and commonwealth typically
only does this for some peacekeeping operation expenses denominated in USD and EUR.
15 Appendix C presents the descriptive statistics of our sample.
16 A similar figure is available in Appendix C which splits spending by capital and resource expenditures.


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
4
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Fig. 1. Fiscal year spending of UK overseas offices in 2008–2019.
Note: The figure presents the fiscal year-end and spending for all UK overseas offices over the period 2008–2019. The first graph demonstrates the fiscal year
cycles. The second graph depicts the average annual spending across countries. The third graph shows spending in March over the average monthly spending.
For the second and third graphs, darker colours imply more spending. Note that while our data is at the level of an individual overseas office, we aggregated
them to a country level for the purposes of these plots.
and budgets. These are relatively few, however, with less than 3.5% of office-budget-year-month observations having negative
total spending. As a result of the possibility of negative spending figures and different scales of spending, we use two different
transformations of this variable. First, we calculate the mean and standard deviation for each office-budget-year, and use these to


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
5
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Fig. 2. Spending over the fiscal year.
Note: The figure depicts the fiscal year spending pattern of all overseas offices depending on the fiscal year-end month (either March, June, September or
December) and budget (either resource or capital). On the horizontal axis is the month of the year (where 1 is for January, 2 is for February, etc.). On the
vertical axis is the month’s average Spending Z (on the top two panels) and average Spending Binary (for the bottom two panels).
create a z-score for each month. We call this standardised variable ‘‘Spending Z’’. Second, for each office-budget-month, we create a
dummy variable taking the value of one if more is spent that month than the monthly average for that office-budget-year. We call
this variable17 ‘‘Spending Binary’’.18
We present each of these two measures in Fig. 2, where we have separated overseas offices into four groups based on when the
local fiscal year-ends.19 The profile of spending is dominated by a large spending spike occurring at the end of the UK fiscal year in
March. We then observe lower spending in April and May. Spending picks up again at the end of the calendar year in December.
In addition, the resource expenditure rises more in March for overseas offices operating in countries where the fiscal year-ends in
March. This is suggestive evidence of a multiplier effect where an economy exhibiting heightened government spending leads to
higher spending on the part of overseas offices. We will examine this more rigorously in the section that follows.
Before progressing however it should be noted that the use of standardisation of our dependent variable means that results in this
paper are expressed in units of standard deviations. As the standard deviation of resource expenditure is lower than that of capital
expenditure that means that the size of year-end spending in the left and right panels in Fig. 2 cannot be easily compared. Capital
expenditure increases more at year-end than resource expenditure however the lower standard deviation of resource expenditure
hides this in Fig. 2.20 We provide additional data and explanation to help relate our regression results to aggregate spending figures
in Appendix F.
17 Specifically for each office-budget-year (where the year refers to a UK fiscal year running from April to March) we have 12 spending figures
[𝑥𝑖,𝑏,𝑦,𝑚]𝑚=1∶12. With these figures we calculate a mean 𝜇𝑖,𝑏,𝑦, a standard deviation 𝜎𝑖,𝑏,𝑦and then calculate Spending Z𝑖,𝑏,𝑦,𝑚=
[ 𝑥𝑖,𝑏,𝑦,𝑚−𝜇𝑖,𝑏,𝑦
𝜎𝑖,𝑏,𝑦
]
𝑚=1∶12. We also calculate
Spending Binary𝑖,𝑏,𝑦,𝑚= [Dummy (𝑥𝑖,𝑏,𝑦,𝑚> 𝜇𝑖,𝑏,𝑦
)]
𝑚=1∶12.
18 Spending Binary throws away a large degree of variation which makes it more robust to outliers but it also means that the magnitude of spending spikes
may be distorted. We hence primarily use Spending Binary as a robustness check on the Spending Z. As we will show however the results from the two dependent
variable transformations are remarkably similar.
19 Note that most countries have a fiscal year that ends at the end of a quarter. For instance, Australia has a fiscal year-ending at the end of June, while the
United States fiscal year-ends at the end of September. There are five exceptions in our dataset, however, including Afghanistan (fiscal year-end December 20);
Ethiopia (fiscal year-end July 7); Iran (fiscal year-end March 20), Nepal (fiscal year-end July 15) and Samoa (fiscal year-end May 31). For this chart we drop
Samoa and round the other cases to the closest month-end which is always at the end of a quarter.
20 This is also an issue for Spending Binary. This happens as a higher standard deviation means more early months have capital expenditure above the annual
mean and hence there is a lower spending spike at year-end.


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
6
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
2.2. Empirical strategy
We examine the extent to which the home fiscal year, the host government fiscal year and local firm fiscal years can affect
overseas offices expenditures with the following benchmark specification:
Spending𝑖,𝑏,𝑚,𝑦= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1LFY End𝑖,𝑚× Home FY End𝑖,𝑚+ 𝛽2Home FY End𝑖,𝑚+
(1)
+ 𝛽3LFY End𝑖,𝑚+ 𝛽4Firms LFY End𝑖,𝑚+ 𝑚+ 𝜓𝑖𝑦+ 𝜖𝑖,𝑏,𝑚,𝑦
where 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑏,𝑚,𝑦is the spending for overseas office 𝑖, budget 𝑏, in month 𝑚and year 𝑦. We use both the Spending Z and Spending
Binary as dependent variables. 𝐻𝑜𝑚𝑒𝐹𝑌𝐸𝑛𝑑𝑖,𝑚is a dummy variable taking value one in March (at the end of the UK fiscal year).
We use two variables to control for the local fiscal year-end. First, 𝐿𝐹𝑌𝐸𝑛𝑑𝑖,𝑚is a dummy variable for the end of the local fiscal
year. Second, 𝐿𝐹𝑌𝐸𝑛𝑑𝑖,𝑚× 𝐻𝑜𝑚𝑒𝐹𝑌𝐸𝑛𝑑𝑖,𝑚is an interaction between the UK fiscal year-end and the local fiscal year-end.
We would expect that the local fiscal year would impact overseas office expenditure due to crowding out as the host government
spends at high levels. While we do not have data on the amount of government spending happening in each country in each month,
the literature has found heightened year-end spending in many countries around the world21 at various levels of development.22
To the extent different groups of overseas offices exhibit different spending patterns we exploit the different spending patterns to
identify the coefficients of 𝐿𝐹𝑌𝐸𝑛𝑑𝑖,𝑚and 𝐿𝐹𝑌𝐸𝑛𝑑𝑖,𝑚× 𝐻𝑜𝑚𝑒𝐹𝑌𝐸𝑛𝑑𝑖,𝑚. The behaviour and preferences of firms can also influence
when governmental spending occurs (e.g. Oyer 1998). To examine this impact, we obtain the constituents of the major large-cap
stock indices for 44 countries from the Bloomberg terminal.23 For each company, we obtain their fiscal year-end month. Then for
each country and each month, we calculate the average (across firms) number of months until the end of the firm fiscal year. We
normalise this to the [0, 1] range24 where a value near 𝑜𝑛𝑒means many firms are near the end of their fiscal years and a value near
𝑧𝑒𝑟𝑜means most firms are near the start of their fiscal year. This is the 𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚𝑠𝐿𝐹𝑌𝐸𝑛𝑑𝑖,𝑚variable in the regression.25
We use the 𝑚vector of fixed effects for each calendar month. The role of this fixed effect is to separate the effect of the home
fiscal year from the other effects we seek to study.26 Given the end of the home fiscal year is of particular interest we do explicitly
control for March and hence the corresponding fixed effect drops out. Our baseline month for Home FY End𝑖,𝑚is January. 𝜓𝑜𝑦is a
vector of fixed effects for each overseas office × year, which allows focusing on variation within a particular office and year rather
than using variation between departments.27 Finally, 𝜖𝑖,𝑏,𝑚,𝑦is the statistical error term. We cluster standard errors at a country
level.28
3. Results
We present the main results of this paper in Table 1. The top panel displays findings for the resource expenditure29 while the
results for capital expenditures are reported in the bottom panel. In each panel the first three columns use Spending Z as the
dependent variable while the last three columns rely on the binary spending variable. Columns 1 and 4 include only governmental
(i.e. local and home) fiscal year-ends. Columns 2 and 5 include only the home fiscal year and the firm year-end variable. In these
regressions there is a drop in sample size reflecting that this firm fiscal year variable cannot be calculated for all countries. Columns
3 and 6 include all of these variables.
Three main findings emerge from this table. First, the overseas offices spend more in the last month of the home fiscal year
for both the capital and the resource expenditure budgets. Focusing on our full model in the resource budget panel, the result for
21 To our knowledge there are no papers that have found examples of countries where the government does not spend more at fiscal year-end.
22 Our identification comes from comparing between the spending patterns of different overseas offices. Note that as countries rarely change fiscal years (in the
period of our data only Timor Leste and Fiji changed fiscal years) the local fiscal year-end is generally time invariant so we cannot use intertemporal variation
to identify it. The key requirement for our results to be meaningful for examining the impact of local fiscal years is that spending patterns are broadly similar
enough for overseas offices in other countries (with other fiscal year-ends) to provide a suitable counterfactual. We believe this is the case as all overseas offices
have the same budgetary framework, management and oversight institutions and perform similar diplomatic tasks. Finally, we note that while this paper uses a
type of cross country regression, our cross country dataset has similar advantages to that of Eichenauer (2020). Similarly to Eichenauer, all of our data is from
one organisation (in our case the UK government), and we do not have the measurement error complications that are often encountered in such settings.
23 Details on these indices can be found in Appendix B.
24 Denoting the average number of months until the end of the fiscal year to be 𝑥which will be in the [0, 11] range the transformation is
(11−𝑥)
11
.
25 Note that given how this variable is constructed, it is only available for countries with a number of publicly traded companies. As a result, we carry out
several regressions that exclude this variable. This variable works out to be roughly uniformly distributed with a minimum of 0, a maximum of 1.0 and the
20%, 40%, 60%, and 80% quartiles being 0.236, 0.43, 0.61, 0.79 respectively. When the governmental fiscal year-ends in December most firm fiscal years also
end around December. However, when the governmental fiscal year does not in December there is no clear relationship with firm fiscal year. For histograms of
the distribution of firm and governmental fiscal years see Fig. D.1 in the appendix.
26 If this is not done, there would be an important omitted variable. We would have obtained the result that the end of the local fiscal year coefficient is
statistically significant because many overseas offices operate in countries with a calendar fiscal year and December tends to be a high spending month in the
UK foreign office generally.
27 These fixed effects are most important for the Spending Binary dependent variable. For the Spending Z score, we have already effectively done a within
transformation by subtracting the mean annual spending while calculating the z score so the fixed effects in an OLS regression do not have a large impact.
28 Note that conclusions of this paper are robust to bootstrapping of standard errors. This is presented in Table G.5, Appendix G.2.
29 The resource spending includes both the Annually Managed Expenditure (AME) and the Departmental Expenditure Limit (DEL). The first budget, chosen
annually, is intended for demand-driven costs, while the latter is allocated during spending reviews held approximately once every three years and is designated
for planned expenditures. In our dataset, the UK FCO obtains approximately 91% of their funding through DEL funds and about 1.5% through AME funds. We
further discuss the differences between these budgets and replicate our analysis for each separately in the appendix Table H.5.


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
7
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Table 1
End of fiscal year spending effects.
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Z
Z
Z
Binary
Binary
Binary
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Resource Budget
Home FY End
1.390∗∗∗
1.395∗∗∗
1.359∗∗∗
0.499∗∗∗
0.497∗∗∗
0.488∗∗∗
(0.061)
(0.074)
(0.082)
(0.023)
(0.029)
(0.032)
LFY End × Home FY End
0.300∗∗∗
0.335∗∗∗
0.085∗∗
0.099∗
(0.102)
(0.125)
(0.040)
(0.051)
LFY End
−0.047
−0.090∗∗
−0.022
−0.040∗
(0.034)
(0.044)
(0.016)
(0.022)
Firms LFY End
0.138
0.107
0.060∗∗
0.057∗∗
(0.090)
(0.075)
(0.025)
(0.022)
Num Countries
180
68
68
180
68
68
Observations
39,996
23,796
23,796
39,996
23,796
23,796
R2
0.224
0.211
0.212
0.231
0.221
0.221
Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Overs. Office × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Panel B: Capital Budget
Home FY End
0.812∗∗∗
0.844∗∗∗
0.867∗∗∗
0.280∗∗∗
0.288∗∗∗
0.298∗∗∗
(0.053)
(0.068)
(0.066)
(0.017)
(0.023)
(0.022)
LFY End × Home FY End
0.003
−0.085
−0.007
−0.034
(0.146)
(0.199)
(0.038)
(0.053)
LFY End
−0.046
−0.088∗∗
−0.024
−0.038∗
(0.031)
(0.041)
(0.015)
(0.022)
Firms LFY End
0.127∗∗∗
0.187∗∗∗
0.043
0.068
(0.047)
(0.061)
(0.036)
(0.044)
Num Countries
166
68
68
166
68
68
Observations
21,840
12,468
12,468
21,840
12,468
12,468
R2
0.158
0.165
0.166
0.305
0.309
0.309
Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Overs. Office × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Note: This table reports the estimates of home, overlapping and non-overlapping fiscal year-end months as well as local firms year-ends. The dependent variable
in columns 1–3 is Spending Z; in the last three columns, it is Spending Binary. Panel A relies on the resource budget spending whilst panel B uses spending from
the capital budget. FE refer to each calendar month and overseas office-times-year fixed effects. The omitted reference category is spending during January. We
report a standard error in parenthesis below each coefficient. Standard errors allow for clustering at the country level. We denote significance using ∗p<0.1;
∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01.
the home fiscal year-end indicates that spending is 1.359 standard deviations higher in the last month. This coefficient for the
capital budget is 0.867 standard deviations. This result is robust in every specification for resource and capital expenditure. The
significance and magnitude of this coefficient confirms the focus of the previous literature on the budgetary fiscal year as the key
driver of year-end spending.
The second key finding is that the LFY End × Home FY End coefficient is significantly positive in the resource expenditure case.
In the benchmark specification, it shows that the size of the year-end spending spike is 0.335 standard deviations higher in countries
with a fiscal year-end in March than in countries with a different fiscal year-end. Back of envelope calculations to convert this result
from standard deviations units towards currency units suggests that March spending is higher by about 0.26 times average month
spending in countries that have the same fiscal year-end as the home country.30 This finding indicates that crowding out effects
exacerbate the size of year-end spending spikes. In addition, the LFY End coefficient is negative for capital expenditure. This is
consistent with embassies moving capital expenditure to other times in the fiscal year where there is less crowding out from host
country governmental spending.31
Finally, in both cases but most strongly in the capital expenditure case there is greater spending later in the fiscal year of local
firms.32 This finding is broadly in agreement with the findings of Oyer (1998) who found evidence of salespeople moving sales with
respect to their firm’s fiscal year. One explanation for why this effect is stronger for capital expenditure is that capital expenditure
items (e.g. computers, furniture, vehicles) are larger items and hence are more likely to be influenced by supplier sales efforts than
resource expenditure items such as salaries, rents and office supplies.
While there could be several mechanisms driving our findings (as discussed in the introduction), the dataset does not allow us
to decompose which are more likely to be driving the effect. We can note however that overseas offices appear to have relatively
inelastic spending patterns in that overall spending is higher at year-end despite congestion of governmental suppliers. In addition,
30 These calculations are related in Appendix F.
31 In the resource expenditure case the corresponding coefficients are not significantly different from zero. This may reflect a greater difficulty in moving the
purchase of these goods/services within the fiscal year.
32 Note that there is a similar effect is significant at the 10% level for some specifications of the resource budget regressions.


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
8
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
firm fiscal years appear to play a significant role. This makes it likely that issues related to the actions and incentives of firms and
salespeople may be important.
We further confirm the robustness of our findings with a number of checks in Appendix G. First, one possible concern a reader
might have is that findings are driven by outliers such as certain countries or years. To address this concern, we use a jackknife
procedure reestimating our regressions after dropping each country and year, in turn, to ensure our results are not driven by any
singular countries or years. We present our findings in Figs. G.1–G.4. These figures also include results of a placebo test to ensure that
specification estimated coefficients are distributed around zero if we deliberately randomise the local host government fiscal year
and firm fiscal years in the data. Second, combining non-overlapping local fiscal year-end into a single binary variable might hide
an important heterogeneity or equally important might demonstrate that our findings only present for certain months. We separate
each local fiscal year-end (i.e. March, June, September and December) and present our results in Table G.1. Third, Table G.2 shows
that our findings are robust if we use log(𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚𝑠𝐿𝐹𝑌𝐸𝑛𝑑𝑖,𝑚+ 1) in place of the firm fiscal year variable. Fourth, previous literature
(e.g. Klymak and Baumann 2022) has identified that spending is the highest in the last month of the fiscal year but tends to be
elevated near that time. We therefore change our end of fiscal year variables (LFY End × Home FY End, LFY End and Home FY
End) to represent the last two months of the fiscal year. Our results remain robust in Table G.3. Fifth, it is possible that the start
(rather than the end) of the host government fiscal year could be busy due to the arrangement of annual contracts. However, we do
not support for this hypothesis in Table G.4. Finally, we replicate the benchmark findings presented in Table 1 with bootstrapped
standard errors which we show in Table G.5.
In Appendix H, we explore several extensions. First, in Table H.1 we test whether the level of economic development, distance
between the UK and local economy, and the EU and Commonwealth membership matter for the pattern we identified in this section.
Whilst the home fiscal year remains statistically significant in all specifications, there is no evidence that local fiscal year-end can be
explained by these factors. Second, we separate the end of local fiscal year effect according to the income level of the host country
in Table H.2. It can be easier to source certain goods and services in more advanced countries. Third, we interact uncertainty and
unemployment with year-end spending in Table H.3.
4. Conclusion
Aside from the budgetary fiscal year, a government department’s expenditure pattern could in principle be affected by the fiscal
year behaviour and spending of other government departments and firms in the economy. We study the impact of this crowding
out using the spending behaviours of the overseas offices of the UK’s foreign and commonwealth offices.
Crowding out could potentially affect spending in two contrasting ways. On one hand, compared to embassies in countries that do
not share the fiscal year-end with the UK, embassies in countries that share the UK fiscal year-end may encounter higher prices and
reduced supplier availability. Consequently, we would expect government departments to shift spending to other times of the year.
For instance, we might expect that a UK overseas office in Australia (where the local fiscal year-ends in June) would have greater
spending spikes in March than overseas offices in Canada (where Canadian government departments are spending at heightened
levels in March). Indeed, we present simple extensions of these models to incorporate congestion effects in Appendix A and these
model extensions confirm the intuition that suggests that congestion should decrease year-end spending as agents shift spending
to other times of the year. On the other hand, embassies could be relatively insensitive to price in making intertemporal spending
decisions and we would expect to observe increased year-end spending.
We present three key findings that are new to the literature. First, the impact of the home budgetary fiscal year is strong in
comparison to the impact of the other government and firm fiscal years. This is a strong result that can be seen in all countries.
Second, government spending is higher later in the fiscal year of local firms. Third, the size of year-end spending is larger for
overseas offices operating in countries which share the home’s end of the fiscal year in March. This suggests that the latter channel
discussed in the previous paragraph is dominant over the former with crowding out from heightened spending of many government
agencies exacerbating the size of year-end spending.
Finally, our results have two main policy implications that could deter year-end spending. First, our findings suggest that
measures to prevent year-end spending in one department could indirectly decrease year-end spending in another. Second, year-end
spending could potentially be reduced if the fiscal years of different departments were unaligned. One way this unalignment could
be achieved is by assigning departments different fiscal years so that only a small fraction has their year-end in any given month.
Acknowledgment
We thank Evi Pappa and the anonymous referees for their constructive and helpful comments that greatly improved this paper.
Appendix A. Crowding out model
This appendix extends previous models of Liebman and Mahoney (2017) and Baumann (2019) to explore their implications for
how crowding out of suppliers can affect year-end spending spikes. To our knowledge, there is no other model to explain year-end
spending in the literature.33 A model for year-end spending spikes requires two features. The first is an incentive for government
33 Whilst Eichenauer (2020) has provided a behavioural explanation that government departments are unable to effectively plan ahead, the author solely took
an empirical approach.


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
9
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
departments to underspend in the early months of the year and hence build up a large amount of unspent funds. The second is an
incentive for them to spend this money at the fiscal year’s end rather than saving it.
The first model in the literature is that of Liebman and Mahoney (2017) who proposed a precautionary savings mechanism. In
this model, government departments have a concave utility function that is subject to a stochastic production shock in each month.
In addition, government departments cannot save unspent funds between fiscal years. In this setting, it is rational for a government
department to build up a precautionary savings fund in the early months of the fiscal year so they can spend more when they receive
beneficial production shocks. At the end of the year, it is rational for them to spend any unspent funds rather than let them expire.
The second model in the literature is that of Baumann (2019) who proposed a procrastination mechanism. In this model,
government departments get an immediate disutility from spending funds due to the effort required. They additionally get positive
utility from spending funds as this improves how their performance is assessed. This positive utility is discounted until the end of
the fiscal year when performance and financial reporting is done. In this setting, it is rational for a department to delay the effort
in spending funds until later in the fiscal year.
For the purposes of our paper, we seek to determine how the congestion effects (such as price increases and supplier unavailability
caused by the heightened spending of other departments) in the final month of the fiscal year affect the size of spending spikes.
The two aforementioned models include a representative government department but they do not consider the impact that one
department may have on another. As a result, we make some modifications to each model to determine the implications of
precautionary savings and procrastination for our research question.
A.1. Precautionary savings
We develop the simplest and most parsimonious model extensions that allow us to explore congestion effects. As a starting
point, we separate department spending into having a quantity and a price component rather than the total spending figure which
entered the utility functions in previous papers. All governments buy a single representative good where the price is set by general
equilibrium. The utility is an increasing function of the quantity bought. There is a unit measure of departments and hence prices
are exogenous of the decisions of a single government department. Specifically in the case of precautionary savings the departments
face a consumption smoothing problem:
𝑉𝑚(𝑏𝑚) = max
𝑥𝑚≤𝑏𝑚
𝑝𝑚
𝜖𝑚𝑥1−𝛾
𝑚
+ 𝛽𝐸[𝑉𝑚′(next budget𝑚′(𝑏𝑚, 𝑥𝑚))]
(2)
subject to: next budget𝑚′(𝑏𝑚, 𝑥𝑚) = 𝑏𝑚−𝑥𝑚𝑝𝑚
for
𝑚< 12
next budget𝑚′(𝑏𝑚, 𝑥𝑚) = 𝐵0
for
𝑚= 12
where 𝜖𝑚∼LogNormal(0, 𝜎) and draws are i.i.d. every month. 𝑝𝑚is the price level in month 𝑚and 𝑥𝑚is the number of goods
bought. 𝑚′ is the next month in the fiscal year.34
We additionally need to specify how prices respond to aggregate demand. Therefore we assume that supplying firms are in perfect
competition and that there is increasing marginal cost. We choose the following form for the market marginal cost function:35
MC(𝑄) = 𝑄𝜃+ 1
(3)
where 𝜃> 0 is a parameter reflecting how sharply cost reacts to increases in demanded quantity. Given the competitive environment,
the market price will be equal to the marginal cost. Therefore Eq. (3) gives prices as a function of the quantity of demand in each
month.
Given Eqs. (2) and (3), we numerically solve the model by first assuming a price vector and then solving for the value functions
of the representative department. We rely on this price vector and associated value functions to then simulate the spending of
government departments and determine what prices should be given the spending profiles of government departments. We use this
as an updated price vector and repeat these steps until we converge to a fixed point price vector.
We then compare the spending profiles generated with an endogenous price vector with the spending profile we get by imposing
even prices in each month of the fiscal year. In this way, we infer the implications of each mechanism for congestion effects between
departments.
A.2. Procrastination
The procrastination model has identical assumptions as the precautionary savings except it relies on a different departmental
utility function. Specifically, departments face a consumption smoothing problem of:
𝑉𝑚(𝑏𝑚) = max
𝑥𝑚≤𝑏𝑚
𝑝𝑚
𝑥∇
𝑚𝐷(𝑚, 12) −𝛺𝑥𝑚+ 𝐷(𝑚, 𝑚′)𝐸[𝑉𝑚′(next budget𝑚′(𝑏𝑚, 𝑥𝑚))]
(4)
34 Note that while the UK does allow rollover of funds between fiscal years with some restrictions, the precautionary savings mechanism cannot explain end
of year spending with an assumption rollover. As a result, we calibrate the model assuming no rollover.
35 We use this market marginal cost function for parsimony and simplicity. We could alternatively assume each firm has a cost function of 𝑐(𝑞) = (𝑁𝑞)𝜃+1
𝑁(𝜃+1) + 𝑞
where 𝑞is one firm’s demand and there are 𝑁firms. This implies the market marginal cost function in Eq. (3).


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
10
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
subject to: next budget𝑚′(𝑏𝑚, 𝑥𝑚) = 𝑏𝑚−𝑥𝑚𝑝𝑚
for
𝑚< 12
next budget𝑚′(𝑏𝑚, 𝑥𝑚) = 𝐵0
for
𝑚= 12
where ∇and 𝛺are parameters that represent the concavity of periodic utility and the disutility of effort respectively. 𝐷(𝑎, 𝑏) is
a discounting between time 𝑎and time 𝑏. While the procrastination model implies increasing spending throughout the year if
exponential discounting is imposed (so 𝐷(𝑎, 𝑏) = 𝛽𝑏−𝑎), a better fit with observed spending data is possible if quasi-hyperbolic
discounting (Laibson, 1997) is used such that 𝐷(𝑎, 𝑏) = 𝑘𝛽𝑏−𝑎where 𝑘is a constant whenever 𝑏> 𝑎. For parsimony, we do not
include a shock process in this case in calibration (although it is generally possible to achieve a reasonable model fit by calibrating
∇, 𝛺and 𝜃while imposing a shock process).
A.3. Parameterisation
To parameterise the model we calibrate it to hit two moments. The first is that the final month’s spending ratio – the ratio of last
month’s spending to the average month’s spending – should be 2.0. The second is that prices in the last month are 2% higher than
average prices within the year. These calibration targets are designed to achieve a reasonable fit of the models to reality however it
is notable that there is a wide range of price ratios and price increases that have been found in the literature. Liebman and Mahoney
(2017) found a spending ratio of 2.18 in US federal government spending while Baumann (2019) found a spending ratio of 3.06
for capital expenditure in Northern Ireland. Klymak and Baumann (2022) detected a price increase of between 1% and 7%.
For the precautionary savings model, we calibrate 𝛾, 𝜎, 𝜃. We impose 5% annual discounting so that 𝛽= 0.996. We get 𝛾= 0.54,
𝜎= 1.6 and 𝜃= 0.996.
For the procrastination model, we calibrate two versions. The first uses exponential discounting and can replicate increasing
spending throughout the year although it cannot replicate the shape increase in the last month of the year. The second uses the
behavioural assumption of hyperbolic discounting (Laibson, 1997) and can better match the pattern seen in the data. For the
exponential discounting version we calibrate ∇, 𝛺, 𝜃. For parsimony, we impose 𝜎= 0. We impose 5% annual discounting so
that 𝛽= 0.996. We obtain ∇= 0.980, 𝛺= 0.923, 𝜃= 0.986. For the exponential discounting version we calibrate ∇, 𝛺, 𝜃. For
parsimony, we impose 𝜎= 0. We impose 5% annual discounting with that 𝛽= 0.998 and 𝑘= 0.975. We obtain ∇= 0.961, 𝛺= 0.984,
𝜃= 0.984.
We simulate spending using the calibrated models to demonstrate the implications of these models for the impact of crowding
out on the size of spending spikes. The results of these simulations are summarised in Fig. A.1. These simulations were done twice.
In the first case we simulate the models with prices in each month being endogenous and determined by Eq. (3). In the second,
‘‘exogenous prices’’, case we impose the same prices in every month of the fiscal year.36 We can compare the results of these two
sets of simulations to determine the implications of each model for the impact of crowding out on the size of year-end spending
spikes.
Fig. A.1(b) shows that quantity demanded is lower in the last month of the fiscal year when prices are endogenous. This is a
clearcut result and in line with departments buying less of the representative good as its price increases. Fig. A.1(c) demonstrates
that total spending at year-end is also lower when prices are endogenous.37 These findings are observed in all three models and
indicate that the effect of a demand reduction (in response to higher prices) outweighs the effect of the price increase so that total
expenditure is reduced.
Our findings demonstrate that spending at the end of the fiscal year is higher in the case where prices do not increase due
to higher demand. These findings imply that congestion effects at year-end should lower the size of year-end spending spikes as
forward looking agents move spending to less congested times of the year. Our empirical results do not support this implication
which may suggest government departments are less price sensitive than has been implied in these models. One way to achieve this
in these models is to assume that the utility of government departments is a function of spending rather than the quantity of the
representative good.
A.4. Regressions on simulated data
To examine how well the empirical results of our paper correspond to the implications of these calibrated models, we repeated
the first specification from Table 1 using data simulated from each of the three calibrated models. We used the following steps to
generate simulation data in a way that is comparable to our real world data:
1. We start by calculating the equilibrium prices in each month of the fiscal year. To achieve this we use the fixed point method
described previously.
2. We assume that every country has the same equilibrium price vector buy shifted so that the price is highest at the end of the
local fiscal year.
36 To ensure that each set of simulations have prices of similar scale the endogenous price simulations were first done and then the average prices (over the
entire fiscal year) were then used in the exogenous price case.
37 In the case of the precautionary savings model and procrastination it might be difficult to see that hyperbolic discounting models as the two spending
profiles largely overlap each other. In the three cases of precautionary savings, procrastination and procrastination (hyperbolic discounting) we find expenditure
in the exogenous cases is respectively 2.4%, 16.2% and 1.2% higher relative to the endogenous case.


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
11
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Fig. A.1. Simulation results for calibrated models of year-end spending.
Note: In all of these plots the horizontal axis is the month of the year with month 12 being the final month. Subfigure (a) shows the average market prices for
each month and each of the three calibrated models. Subfigure (b) shows the average quantity of the representative good that is demanded each month. This is
done in two cases, the first when prices respond to demand (the ‘‘endogenous’’ case) and on average prices increase throughout the year as shown in subfigure
(a). In the second case, prices do not respond to demand (the ‘‘exogenous’’ case) and prices are constant throughout the year. By contrasting these two cases
we can see each model’s implications for how crowding out impacts year-end spending behaviour. Finally in subfigure (c) we see the average total expenditure
(price times quantity demanded) in each month of the fiscal year.


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
12
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Table A.1
Regressions on simulated data.
Precautionary
Procrastination
Procrastination
savings
hyperbolic
Spending
Spending
Spending
Z
Z
Z
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Resource Budget
Home FY End
0.605
3.106
3.899
(0.02697075)
LFY End × Home FY End
−0.000862
0.279
0.0325
(0.0725)
LFY End
−0.0314
−0.416
−0.032
(0.0313)
Observations
40,296
40,296
40,296
R2
0.030
0.978
0.999
Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Note: The coefficients in this table were estimated based on data simulated in the method discussed in Appendix A.4. As the procrastination model was calibrated
without a shock process every year of simulated data has the same spending values as other years. As a result bootstrapped coefficient standard errors are nearly
zero in these cases (the only source of variation is the shifting equilibrium price vector) and we have chosen not to report them.
3. We then note that for the regression in column one of Table 1 we have 567, 254, 233, 2304 office-years where the local fiscal
year ends in March, June, September, December respectively.38 In the model the fiscal year ends in month 12. Making the
connection that month 12 in the model lines up with March as the home country year-end in our real data, we can simulate
567 years worth of data for the case when the local fiscal year ends in March using the unchanged price vector.
4. We simulate 254 years of data for when the local fiscal year ends in June/ September/ December by rotating the price vector
so that the price peaks 3/6/9 months after the end of the home fiscal year in months 3/6/9.
5. For all simulated years of data we calculate Spending Binary in the same way as described in Section 2.1.
6. We then create month dummies as well as the dummy variables: Home FY End; LFY End; LFY End × Home FY End. As the
data is simulated with a representative office, we use year fixed effects rather than office-year fixed effects.
7. We perform a regression and record the coefficients.
We repeat the above procedure 50 times and record 50 different sets of coefficients. We then calculate the mean and standard
deviation of coefficients and present them in Table A.1. We additionally record the sample size and the average 𝑅2 (calculated
between these 50 regressions). Note that one limitation is that for simplicity we calibrated the procrastination model in the case
where there are no production shocks. The absence of any randomness means that every simulated year spending is exactly the same
as it is in the corresponding month of any other simulated year. This means that all coefficients are the same and our bootstrapped
standard errors are zero. As a result, we do not report standard errors for the procrastination models.
The 𝑅2 is close to one in the procrastination cases which is a result of the lack of any randomness in this model.39 On the other
hand, the 𝑅2 for the precautionary savings model is far below the 𝑅2 found in Table 1 which is a result of this model needing a
high variance shock process for the increase in spending in the final month to match the magnitude seen in the data.40
Appendix B. Data sources
Our primary data source for this analysis was the spending of the United Kingdom’s foreign office’s embassies, high commissions,
consulates, missions and other offices. To determine governmental fiscal year dates we performed a number of searches for each
country. Finally, we also obtained major large cap stock market indices for each country. Then for each constituent we found out
their fiscal year-end month from the Bloomberg terminal (using EQY_FISCAL_YR_END field name). These stock market indices are
included in Table B.1.
Appendix C. Spending map for capital and resource expenditure
See Fig. C.1.
See Table C.1.
38 These figures are considering the resource expenditure case. Note that as the models treat resource and capital expenditure symmetrically we do not
separately consider the two for the purposes of running regressions on simulated data.
39 The original paper on the procrastination model (Baumann, 2019) calibrated the ∇, 𝛺parameters as well as the variance of a shock process so that
the variance of the spending data matched the variance of simulated spending. This was not done in this paper to avoid needing to do a four dimensional
optimisation (as we additionally needed to calibrate 𝜃).
40 This point is discussed further in Baumann (2019, pg 724).


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
13
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Table B.1
Stock market indices.
Bloomberg Index Ticker
Country
MERVAL
Argentina
AS51
Australia
ATX
Austria
BEL20
Belgium
IBOV
Brazil
SPTSX
Canada
IGPA
Chile
SHSZ300
China
PX
Czechia
OMXC25
Denmark
EGX30
Egypt
TALSE
Estonia
HEL25
Finland
CAC
France
DAX
Germany
HSI
Hong Kong
BUX
Hungary
ICEXI
Iceland
NIFTY
India
JCI
Indonesia
ISEQ
Ireland
TA-35
Israel
NKY
Japan
JOSMGNFF
Jordan
MEXBOL
Mexico
AMX
Netherlands
NZSE50FG
New Zealand
NSEASI
Nigeria
OBX
Norway
KSE100
Pakistan
PCOMP
Philippines
WIG20
Poland
PSI20
Portugal
SASEIDX
Saudi Arabia
STI
Singapore
TOP40
South Africa
IBEX
Spain
OMX
Sweden
TWSE
Taiwan
SET
Thailand
XU100
Türkiye
DFMGI
United Arab Emirates
SPX
United States
VNINDEX
Vietnam
Note: The table shows the list of stock market indices we use to create the
local firm fiscal years. We choose a relatively broad stock market index for each
country. In countries where there are multiple prominent indices (e.g. the USA
has SPX, RUA and others) a larger cap index was chosen (e.g. SPX rather than
RUA for the USA).
Appendix D. How fiscal years are chosen
Governmental and company fiscal years do not necessarily overlap as organisations often have the freedom to choose their fiscal
year period. Government fiscal years are set for historical, climate, religious and political reasons that do not necessarily overlap
with the reasons that firms may choose their own fiscal years. For instance, the fiscal year in Iran and Afghanistan starts on March
21 for religious reasons. According to the International Monetary Fund (2016) in Mongolia public projects can only be undertaken
in four months of the year when the soil temperature is above freezing. The timing of the fiscal year is arranged so that there is
sufficient funding available at that time.
Firm fiscal years are set for reasons that can be quite different. For example, agricultural firms tend to have the highest sales
after the harvest season and may prefer to have the fiscal year-end just after this time. Firms may also choose fiscal years that align
with their peers to allow analysts to more effectively cover their relative performance (Price Waterhouse Coopers, 2023). Seasonal
firms may also choose for their fiscal year-end to be in a quieter time of the year (as typically a large amount of accounting needs
to be done at year-end).
Similarly, many retail businesses tend to earn the most revenue in the last quarter of the year and may therefore prefer to choose
the fiscal year that reflects their revenue patterns the best. In addition, governments and firms can have different financial reporting
requirements and fiscal goals which can further drive the discrepancy.


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
14
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Fig. C.1. Overseas offices expenditure by budget types.
Note: The figure illustrates the average annual spending for overseas offices at a country level. The top panel shows the average annual resource expenditure
while the bottom panel shows the average annual capital expenditure. These averages are calculated for the 2008–2018 period. Note that while our data is at
the level of an individual overseas office, they have been aggregated to a country level for the purposes of these plots.
This divergence can be seen in Fig. D.1 particularly for countries where the fiscal year is not the calendar year with Japan,
Australia and Trinidad and Tobago being notable exceptions.
Appendix E. Resource and capital expenditure rules
The UK’s Consolidated budgetary guidance documents describe what types of expenditure can be undertaken by overseas offices
under resource or capital designated budgets. The resource budget aims to capture current spending. Specifically, it is used for regular
expenses such as salaries, current procurement, grants and subsidies, tangible (e.g. land) and intangible fixed assets (e.g. software),
as well as current assets (e.g. inventory). The resource spending can have both an immediate effect on the embassy’s fiscal position
(e.g. salaries) and the embassy’s future position (e.g. impairments and provisions) (Treasury, 2023).
The main elements of the capital budget include expenditure on fixed assets, inventories and certain financial transactions (for
instance long-term debt). In terms of determining if an expenditure item should be included as resource or capital expenditure
the guidance states ‘‘departments should consistently follow agreed accounting policies when deciding what costs of a project should be
capitalised. In most cases, this should be uncontroversial but there are a few categories of expenditure, such as some consultancy costs, that
could be either capital or resource, and departments should approach this carefully (Treasury, 2023, section 6.3)’’.
There are specific circumstances in which the resource and capital budgets can interact. As one example the procurement of
inventories is generally always done as part of the capital budget. When these inventories are used then the resource budget
effectively buys these items from the capital budget (and the capital budget is allowed to retain this ‘‘income’’) (Treasury, 2023,


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
15
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Table C.1
Descriptive statistics.
Variable
Group
All months except March
Local
Home
N
and local year-end
year-end
year-end
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Budget
Capital
24, 025.01
37, 297.19
100, 657.70
24,134
Budget
Resource
206, 608.30
331, 434.90
445, 978.60
40,863
Commonwealth
Yes
118, 868.10
197, 222.60
303, 307.70
16,342
Commonwealth
No
145, 526.60
230, 366.40
322, 516.50
48,655
Distance from the UK
High
138, 961.60
253, 227.70
332, 346.50
30,253
Distance from the UK
Low
145, 530.20
202, 711.40
318, 796.70
32,299
GDP
High
134, 176.90
202, 175.90
285, 327.80
29,690
GDP
Low
154, 747.50
256, 155.00
363, 447.20
29,829
Inflation
High
138, 637.10
196, 252.80
333, 805.20
21,905
Inflation
Low
150, 332.00
229, 386.70
309, 642.80
21,908
UK fiscal year
2008
97, 828.70
158, 400.40
255, 141.30
6025
UK fiscal year
2009
110, 140.20
145, 515.60
275, 831.90
5994
UK fiscal year
2010
117, 864.50
167, 016.50
240, 797.50
5917
UK fiscal year
2011
122, 258.70
159, 080.40
265, 875.30
6035
UK fiscal year
2012
132, 271.50
196, 244.90
293, 187.00
5824
UK fiscal year
2013
128, 198.30
201, 171.60
298, 152.50
6216
UK fiscal year
2014
126, 663.60
177, 068.70
306, 214.60
6136
UK fiscal year
2015
155, 112.20
210, 975.90
338, 496.70
5613
UK fiscal year
2016
147, 433.40
427, 040.70
352, 542.40
5673
UK fiscal year
2017
189, 306.70
281, 557.00
373, 044.10
5794
UK fiscal year
2018
206, 085.40
339, 353.90
508, 901.50
5770
Note: This table describes the average spending (in GBP) for one overseas office in one month by budget, level of GDP per capita, distance from the UK, inflation
and each fiscal year. For instance it can be seen that the average overseas office spend £24013.10 from their capital budgets in months that are not the local
or home end of fiscal year. The budget is separated by type. GDP per capita, distance and inflation are divided into two groups depending on whether each
variable is below or above the median value in our dataset. Column (3) presents expenditure for all months excluding March (i.e. the UK fiscal year-end) and
the end of the local fiscal year, whilst column (4) shows spending in the last month of the local fiscal year. Column (5) describes expenditure for the UK fiscal
year-end and the last column (6) reports the number of observations.
section 7.2). As another example when a fixed asset is sold then the book value of the asset will flow into the capital budget while
the difference between the sale price and the book value goes into the resource budget.
Embassies could also earn income from selling goods and providing services. In some circumstances, the department can retain
this income typically as part of the resource budget (Treasury, 2023, section 4.26).
Appendix F. Interpretation of regression coefficients using spending Z
All our regressions use either Spending Z or Spending Binary in place of actual spending figures. This was done primarily so that
each overseas office’s spending figures are comparable even when their absolute spending amounts can differ by a large degree.
It does complicate the interpretation of coefficients, however. If we define the ‘‘spending ratio’’ as the ratio between last month
and average month spending then a naive interpretation of Table 1 would suggest that the spending ratio is larger for resource
expenditure than for capital expenditure while the aggregate spending pattern of Fig. F.1 shows that this is not the case.
The reason behind this is that a larger spending ratio does not necessarily translate to a greater magnitude Spending Z as it
also increases the standard deviation of spending which offsets the magnitude increase. Resource spending tends to have a small
standard deviation of spending while capital spending has a larger standard deviation. This is because a large portion of resource
expenditure has to be spent at specified times that a budget manager cannot alter. Rent and salaries for instance cannot be paid at
times other than when the rental/employment contracts specify. On the other hand capital expenditure is easier to move around
the year. If computers are not replaced this month they can usually be replaced next month without the overseas office enduring a
large inconvenience (assuming the computers to be replaced are still working).
To illustrate the relationship between the spending ratio and Spending Z in the last month of the year, assume that budget
managers have some an annual budget of 1. Each month they spend this we can assume that budget managers must spend 𝛼
12 where
𝛼< 1. This is non-discretionary spending. This leaves the amount 1−𝛼which is discretionary spending. They spend this in the same
pattern as the smoothed capital expenditure line from Fig. F.1 but with the amounts normalised so total spending over the year is
1−𝛼. We will not try to determine the optimality of budget managers spending in this way but we can use these simple assumptions
on spending to relate the proportion of discretionary spending to the standard deviation of the resultant total spending figures.
We present results for different values of 𝛼in Table F.1, where the second column shows the final month spending divided by
the monthly mean spending. Comparing this to Fig. F.1, it can be seen that if 𝛼= 0.6 the March spending ratio is approximately
equal to what we can see for resource spending. It is also notable that Spending Z does not change. In doing the standardisation
any spending that is constant for all months does not contribute to the standard deviation and is subtracted away as part of the
monthly mean.
For the purposes of our analysis this is a useful feature as it allows us to focus on spending that changes through the year
which is the goal of this paper. It does however mean that it is not possible to relate coefficients predicting Spending Z back to


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
16
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Fig. D.1. Histogram showing the relationship between governmental and firm fiscal years.
Note: The figure above splits our sample into four buckets depending on when the local governmental fiscal year is closest to March, June, September, December.
For each we then plotted a histogram of the average length of time between January and the end of the fiscal year for a firm in that country. Note that this
table only includes countries where we have a stock market index (those countries in Table B.1). We can see that relatively few countries in this subsample
have fiscal years that do not end in march, the names of these countries are affixed as labels to the histogram. In addition next to the names of these countries,
we indicate the number of office-budget-years in our dataset. It can be seen that in countries where the fiscal year ends in December, most but not all firms
have fiscal years ending near December. In other countries, the firm fiscal year has no clear relation to the country’s national fiscal year.
Table F.1
Raw and Z Scored Spending.
alpha
March Spending
Monthly Mean
Monthly Mean
Standard Deviation
March Spending Z
0
2.92
0.083
0.055
2.927
0.1
2.728
0.083
0.049
2.927
0.2
2.536
0.083
0.044
2.927
0.3
2.344
0.083
0.038
2.927
0.4
2.152
0.083
0.033
2.927
0.5
1.96
0.083
0.027
2.927
0.6
1.768
0.083
0.022
2.927
0.7
1.576
0.083
0.016
2.927
0.8
1.384
0.083
0.011
2.927
0.9
1.192
0.083
0.005
2.927
Note: This data was generated using the method described in Appendix F. Notably, Spending Z for the last month of the year does not change as the proportion
of flat spending, spending that does not change month to month, increases.


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
17
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Fig. F.1. Monthly total spending compared to monthly mean.
Note: To create this chart we first calculate total spending taking place in each month (over all embassies and years in our dataset and without any rescaling
being performed). We then average these 12 numbers for both resource and capital spending separately. We then divide the 12 monthly spending figures by
the corresponding annual average to get the values on the vertical axis. The highest value is for capital expenditure in March which is 3.09. This indicates that
together over the sample period, overseas offices spend 3.09 times more on capital goods than they do in the average month. The two smoothed lines were
calculated by fitting the regression Spending moment = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1(month) + 𝛽2 exp(month) where month is 1 in April and 12 in March.
the implied total spending ratios without further information. As a result, we have taken a selection of overseas-office budget years
and presented them below in Table F.2. To illustrate how to interpret this we can note that from the first regression of Table 1
the coefficient for Home FY End is 1.388 for Resource spending. In the case of Ottawa, mean spending was £253 062 while this
coefficient suggests that March spending is higher at £253 062 + 1.388(£293 485) = £660 419.18. Comparing this March spending
figure to mean spending suggests a spending ratio of 2.61.
The coefficient for LFY End × Home FY End for resource spending is 0.299 while the LFY End coefficient is −0.044. Once these
are taken into account (note that the Canadian fiscal year ends in March like the UK fiscal year) predicted March spending is £253
062 + (1.388+0.299-0.044)(£293 485) = £735 258 which suggests a spending ratio of 2.91.
We repeat this calculation for every overseas office, each year and each budget. To simplify the presentation of results we add
the regression implied mean and March spending from each overseas office so we have one value for each year and each budget.
We present our findings in Table F.3.41 This table suggests that in general the local fiscal year ending in March adds on average
0.26 to the year-end spending ratio.
Appendix G. Robustness
G.1. Placebo and Jacknife tests
We do a number of bootstrap, jackknife and placebo tests to ensure the robustness of our findings. These are presented in
Figs. G.2–G.4. For all of the tests we use the same specification as in the first column of Table 1 with the exception of the tests on
the 𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚𝑠𝐿𝐹𝑌𝐸𝑛𝑑variable which use the specification of the third column of Table 1.
In each case, we present the distribution of selected coefficients produced by a certain change to the dataset. For the bootstrap
panels, this change is a sampling with the replacement of observations from the dataset. In all cases, we observe the centre of the
distribution around the coefficient values presented in Table 1, with the spread of the distribution reflecting the standard errors.
41 One point to note is that there is higher spending ratio in 2009 relative to other years. This is a result of higher variability in monthly spending figures
in this year. The use of the z transform removes the higher variability at the regression stage but the impact returns once we use these standard deviations to
calculate spending ratios.


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
18
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Table F.2
Mean and standard deviations used in z-scoring for selected overseas offices in 2016.
City
Country
Fiscal Year
Resource
Resource
Capital
Capital
(mean)
(std)
(mean)
(std)
Canberra
Australia
1 July–30 June
410,775
341,245
2785
9243
Ottawa
Canada
1 April–31 March
253,062
293,485
2841
6759
Santiago
Chile
Calendar year
141,772
126,456
1269
2521
Banjul
The Gambia
Calendar year
76,951
21,018
2214
7668
New Delhi
India
1 April–31 March
1567,219
734,689
11,565
23,658
Vientiane
Laos
1 October–30 September
129,471
54,209
3974
62,220
Dar Es Salaam
Tanzania
1 July–30 June
711,686
1,338,183
4034
8909
Montevideo
Uruguay
Calendar year
129,862
57,009
2163
7492
Washington
United States
1 October–30 September
1,842,810
612,522
29,083
60,092
Note: The above are the means and standard deviations (std) used in z-scoring for a sample of the overseas offices in the dataset. These are for the year of
2016. The offices here were chosen to be geographically diverse, diverse in terms of income of the host country and also represent different fiscal year-ends.
Table F.3
Implied change in year-end spending ratio.
Fiscal
Year
Resource
Capital
Spending ratio
Spending ratio
(March local year-end)
Difference
Spending ratio
Spending ratio
(March local year-end)
Difference
2008
2.06
2.25
0.19
2.76
2.66
−0.1
2009
4.8
5.5
0.7
3.13
3.02
−0.12
2010
2.95
3.31
0.36
2.98
2.87
−0.11
2011
2.05
2.25
0.19
3.23
3.11
−0.12
2012
1.64
1.75
0.12
2.13
2.07
−0.06
2013
2.81
3.14
0.33
3.95
3.78
−0.16
2014
1.88
2.04
0.16
3.01
2.9
−0.11
2015
2.26
2.49
0.23
3.26
3.13
−0.12
2016
2.6
2.89
0.29
3.41
3.27
−0.13
2017
1.79
1.93
0.14
3.12
3
−0.12
2018
1.83
1.98
0.15
2.36
2.28
−0.08
0.26
−0.11
Note: A spending ratio is taking only overseas offices located in countries with a March year-end. For each such office we calculate a spending ratio by dividing
regression implied spending (using the Home FY End coefficient of the first regression model of Table 1) in March against the annual average monthly spending
figures. In the ‘‘March local year-end’’ columns we additionally add the effect of the LFY End × Home FY End and LFY End coefficients. We add across overseas
offices for each budget and year and this addition is done for both the numerator and denominator of the spending ratio before the division is calculated. The
difference is calculated as a simple difference between columns 2, 3 and 5, 6 above and reflects the extent to which the local fiscal year ending in March
changes the spending ratio for UK government departments. One point to note is that there is a higher spending ratio in 2009 relative to other years. This is
a result of higher variability in monthly spending figures in this year. The use of the z transform removes the higher variability at the regression stage but the
impact returns once we use these standard deviations to calculate spending ratios.
The panels immediately below the bootstrap results are for jackknifing. We present two jackknife findings. In the first case,
we drop each country in turn from our dataset while estimating the coefficient based on the remaining countries. In the second
jackknife, we drop each year in turn and estimate based on the remaining years. The results below show that the coefficients we
estimate do not change much in any of the jackknife samples. This indicates that our results do not come from a single outlier
country or year.
Finally in the bottom panels (for all except Fig. G.1)42 we present a placebo test result which we undertake in two ways. First,
we replace the end of the local host country fiscal years with a random month. Second, we also randomise the Firms LFY End𝑖,𝑚
variable. This is done by adding a random number in the [0, 1] range to this variable which in effect rotates the local firm fiscal year
a number of months in the year. The results of these placebos report coefficients around zero which indicates that our specification
does not deliver significant coefficients on randomised data.
G.2. Alternative regressors of interest and clustering
In the paper’s main body, we demonstrated that our results are generally robust to two different dependent variables. We
additionally show that our findings are robust to alternative variables defining the ends of fiscal years and clustering of standard
errors.
42 No placebo was done in this case as the UK fiscal year effect affects all observations in our dataset. The possible placebo techniques would be to randomise
the UK fiscal year variable in a way that is not internally consistent, pretend that a different month was the end of the fiscal year, or shuffle the monthly
spending figures. Whilst the results from these all deliver coefficients centred around 0, this is not surprising given how heavyhanded these randomisations were.
As a result, we decided not to report them.


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
19
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Fig. G.1. Robustness of the home fiscal year-end.
Note: The figure illustrates the findings of several robustness tests of the home fiscal year-end Home FY End for capital (on the left) and resource (on the right)
budgets. The top panel presents bootstrap results, while the next two panels report the jackknife tests outcome for countries and years.
Our first robustness check relies on specification where we separate each local fiscal year-end. Specifically, we have a different
variable for each end of the local fiscal year depending on whether it happens in March, June, September or December. In the case
of December the LFY End March dummy variable is one for observations taking place in March and where the overseas office is
located in a country where the fiscal year ends in March.43 The other dummy variables are analogously encoded. We exhibit our
results in Table G.1. The overlapping fiscal year-end (i.e. LFY End March) result for the resource budget remains robust. Within the
same budget, we find negative effects for June and September. The findings for December year-end coefficients suggest no effect
on the resource budget and negative spending for the capital budget.
For our second robustness check, we take the logarithm of the variable representing the local firm fiscal year ends which we
call Log Firms LFY End.44 We present our findings in Table G.2. In line with our benchmark results, there is higher spending at the
local firms’ year-end for the capital budget and no statistically significant effect for the resource budget. Home and overlapping
local year-end coefficients remained statistically significant.
43 So LFY End March will be 1 in March for an overseas office in Canada but not for an overseas office in Australia. In this way, we can identify the coefficient
for LFY End March separately from the coefficient for Home FY End.
44 We take logarithm while adding one (i.e log(𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚𝑠𝐿𝐹𝑌𝐸𝑛𝑑𝑖,𝑚+ 1).


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
20
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Fig. G.2. Robustness of the overlapping fiscal year-end.
Note: The figure illustrates the findings of several robustness tests of the overlapping local fiscal year-end LFY End×Home FY End for capital (on the left) and
resource (on the right) budgets. The top panel presents bootstrap results, while the next two panels report the jackknife tests outcome for countries and years.
The bottom panel presents the results of placebo tests.
For our third robustness check, we use the last two months of the local fiscal year rather than the last month of the local
government fiscal year. This is presented in Table G.3 which shows coefficients that are in line with the benchmark specification.
For our fourth robustness check, we control for the start of the local fiscal year along with our regular variables. There are
plausible reasons why the start of the local fiscal year might have an impact on the spending of overseas offices. This could occur
because annual contracting often takes place in the first month of the fiscal year (e.g. Klymak and Baumann 2022) which may lead
to crowding out at this time. Our results are presented in Table G.4. The findings remain robust throughout all specifications and
we do not find any evidence for the start of fiscal year effect.
Our final robustness check is presented in Table G.5. We recreate Table 1 but use bootstrapped standard errors instead of
standard errors clustered at the country level. All findings remain robust throughout all specifications and confirm the year-end
effects presented before.
Appendix H. Extensions
One potential consideration is that the influence of a host country’s fiscal year on home overseas office spending patterns could
depend on its economic conditions. To investigate this, we repeat the specifications controlling for home, overlapping and local


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
21
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Fig. G.3. Robustness of the local fiscal year-end.
Note: The figure illustrates the findings of several robustness tests of the non-overlapping local fiscal year-end LFY End for capital (on the left) and resource (on
the right) budgets. The top panel presents bootstrap results, while the next two panels report the jackknife tests outcome for countries and years. The bottom
panel presents the results of placebo tests.
fiscal year-end along with regular fixed effects (i.e. specification in column 1 of Table 1). We then interact the local fiscal year with
several selected variables obtained from the dataset of Conte et al. (2022). Our specification is as follows:
Spending𝑖,𝑏,𝑚,𝑦= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1LFY End𝑖,𝑚× Home FY End𝑖,𝑚× 𝑉𝑖,𝑚+ 𝛽2Home FY End𝑖,𝑚+
(5)
+ 𝛽3LFY End𝑖,𝑚× 𝑉𝑖,𝑚+ 𝑚+ 𝜓𝑖𝑦+ 𝜖𝑖,𝑏,𝑚,𝑦
where all variables have the same meaning as described below Eq. (1). The one addition is 𝑉𝑖,𝑚which stands in for one of our three
selected interaction variables.45
45 Note that 𝑉𝑖,𝑚is not included as a standalone regressor as a result of the fixed effects structure which causes it to drop out. In the EU membership case
the interaction with LFY End × Home FY End also drops out as no EU countries have a March year-end.


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
22
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Fig. G.4. Robustness of firms local fiscal year-end.
Note: The figure illustrates the findings of several robustness tests of the local firms fiscal year-end Firms LFY End for capital (on the left) and resource (on the
right) budgets. The top panel presents bootstrap results, while the next two panels report the jackknife tests outcome for countries and years. The bottom panel
presents the results of placebo tests.
The first selected variable is logarithm GDP per capita (PPP).46 The motivation for this is that wealthier countries may have
larger year-end spending spikes.47 These large year-end spending spikes may lead to more crowding out and hence more of an
impact on the UK overseas offices located in these wealthier countries. The second selected variable is an EU membership dummy.
Throughout the study period, the UK was a member of the European Union and hence had free trade with EU countries. In these
circumstances, the overseas office might be expected to source more goods and services from the UK and hence have less exposure
to the local fiscal year. The third selected variable is the logarithm of distance (measured in kilometres) between the UK and the
overseas country. This is also a proxy for the ease of trade between the UK and the overseas country. Finally, we interact with
Commonwealth membership where the majority of countries are former territories of the British Empire. This variable acts as a
proxy for common historical ties and similar institutional set up.
46 The coefficients in the table below use a z transform of this variable. Note that as a linear transformation, this will not affect significance but does moderate
the size of coefficients.
47 The extent to which year-end spending spikes occur in poorer countries has not been well studied. Most previous studies in the economics literature on
this topic have only examined OECD countries with the exception of our previous paper examining the (transition economy) Ukraine (Klymak and Baumann,
2022).


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
23
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Table G.1
Separated end of fiscal year spending effects.
Spending Z
Spending Binary
Resource
Capital
Resource
Capital
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Home FY End
1.148∗∗∗
0.822∗∗∗
0.497∗∗∗
0.258∗∗∗
(0.053)
(0.043)
(0.023)
(0.016)
LFY End March
0.228∗∗∗
−0.069
0.064∗∗
−0.028
(0.081)
(0.122)
(0.031)
(0.034)
LFY End June
−0.073
−0.024
−0.054∗
−0.019
(0.062)
(0.046)
(0.031)
(0.021)
LFY End September
−0.100∗∗∗
0.013
−0.032∗
0.008
(0.032)
(0.057)
(0.019)
(0.020)
LFY End December
−0.006
−0.079∗∗
−0.010
−0.035∗∗
(0.050)
(0.040)
(0.026)
(0.017)
Observations
39,984
21,840
40,128
23,652
R2
0.174
0.084
0.232
0.310
Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Overs. Office × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Note: ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01. This table reports the estimates of home, overlapping and non-overlapping fiscal year-end months. The dependent variable in
(1) and (2) columns is Spending Z; in columns (3) and (4), it is Spending Binary. The first two specifications rely on the resource budget spending whilst the latter
two use spending from the capital budget. FE refer to each calendar month and overseas office-times-year fixed effects. The omitted category is spending during
January. We report a standard error in parenthesis below each coefficient. Standard errors allow for clustering at the country level. We denote significance using
∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01.
Table G.2
Fiscal year-end effects for capital and resource expenditures with alternative local firms fiscal year-end.
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Z
Z
Z
Binary
Binary
Binary
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Resource Budget
Home FY End
1.390∗∗∗
1.389∗∗∗
1.354∗∗∗
0.499∗∗∗
0.495∗∗∗
0.486∗∗∗
(0.061)
(0.076)
(0.083)
(0.023)
(0.029)
(0.032)
LFY End × Home FY End
0.300∗∗∗
0.335∗∗∗
0.085∗∗
0.099∗
(0.102)
(0.123)
(0.040)
(0.050)
LFY End
−0.047
−0.087∗
−0.022
−0.039∗
(0.034)
(0.045)
(0.016)
(0.022)
Log Firms LFY End
0.205∗
0.159
0.089∗∗∗
0.083∗∗∗
(0.123)
(0.102)
(0.033)
(0.029)
Num Countries
180
68
68
180
68
68
Observations
39,996
23,796
23,796
39,996
23,796
23,796
R2
0.224
0.211
0.212
0.231
0.221
0.221
Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Overs. Office × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Panel B: Capital Budget
Home FY End
0.812∗∗∗
0.838∗∗∗
0.859∗∗∗
0.280∗∗∗
0.286∗∗∗
0.295∗∗∗
(0.053)
(0.069)
(0.066)
(0.017)
(0.024)
(0.022)
LFY End × Home FY End
0.003
−0.085
−0.007
−0.034
(0.146)
(0.198)
(0.038)
(0.052)
LFY End
−0.046
−0.084∗∗
−0.024
−0.036∗
(0.031)
(0.040)
(0.015)
(0.021)
Log Firms LFY End
0.197∗∗∗
0.273∗∗∗
0.068
0.100
(0.068)
(0.084)
(0.054)
(0.063)
Num Countries
166
68
68
166
68
68
Observations
21,840
12,468
12,468
21,840
12,468
12,468
R2
0.158
0.165
0.166
0.305
0.309
0.309
Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Overs. Office × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Note: This table reports the estimates of home, overlapping and non-overlapping fiscal year-end months as well as local firms year-ends. The dependent variable
in columns 1–3 is Spending Z; in the last three columns, it is Spending Binary. Panel A relies on the resource budget spending whilst panel B uses spending from
the capital budget. FE refer to each calendar month and overseas office-times-year fixed effects. The omitted reference category is spending during January. We
report a standard error in parenthesis below each coefficient. Standard errors allow for clustering at the country level. We denote significance using ∗p<0.1;
∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01.
Our finding are presented in Table H.1. The results for logarithm GDP per capita in columns (1) and (4) indicate that in the
resource expenditure case there is a greater impact of the host government fiscal year. This finding is intuitive and is consistent with
wealthier countries having larger governmental sectors have a greater impact on overseas offices. The findings in columns (2) and


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
24
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Table G.3
End of fiscal year spending with two months start and end dummies.
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Z
Z
Z
Binary
Binary
Binary
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Resource Budget
Home FY End
1.400∗∗∗
1.395∗∗∗
1.371∗∗∗
0.499∗∗∗
0.497∗∗∗
0.490∗∗∗
(0.058)
(0.074)
(0.078)
(0.022)
(0.029)
(0.031)
Home 2nd Last Month FY End
0.270∗∗∗
0.303∗∗∗
0.274∗∗∗
0.143∗∗∗
0.159∗∗∗
0.150∗∗∗
(0.032)
(0.040)
(0.045)
(0.016)
(0.021)
(0.023)
LFY End 2 Months
−0.035
−0.068∗∗
−0.010
−0.020
(0.028)
(0.031)
(0.013)
(0.016)
LFY End × Home FY End 2 Months
0.226∗∗∗
0.265∗∗∗
0.073∗∗
0.081∗∗
(0.070)
(0.079)
(0.030)
(0.037)
Log Firms LFY End
0.138
0.086
0.060∗∗
0.043∗∗
(0.090)
(0.052)
(0.025)
(0.019)
Num Countries
180
68
68
180
68
68
Observations
39,996
23,796
23,796
39,996
23,796
23,796
R2
0.224
0.211
0.212
0.231
0.221
0.221
Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Overs. Office × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Panel B: Capital Budget
Home FY End
0.804∗∗∗
0.844∗∗∗
0.843∗∗∗
0.279∗∗∗
0.288∗∗∗
0.291∗∗∗
(0.053)
(0.068)
(0.069)
(0.018)
(0.023)
(0.024)
Home 2nd Last Month FY End
0.146∗∗∗
0.150∗∗∗
0.154∗∗∗
0.073∗∗∗
0.075∗∗∗
0.082∗∗∗
(0.035)
(0.045)
(0.049)
(0.014)
(0.017)
(0.019)
LFY End 2 Months
−0.045∗∗
−0.082∗∗∗
−0.026∗∗∗
−0.042∗∗∗
(0.022)
(0.030)
(0.009)
(0.014)
LFY End × Home FY End 2 Months
0.051
0.033
−0.0001
−0.012
(0.076)
(0.074)
(0.036)
(0.035)
Log Firms LFY End
0.127∗∗∗
0.191∗∗∗
0.043
0.088∗∗
(0.047)
(0.045)
(0.036)
(0.038)
Num Countries
166
68
68
166
68
68
Observations
21,840
12,468
12,468
21,840
12,468
12,468
R2
0.158
0.165
0.166
0.305
0.309
0.309
Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Overs. Office × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Note: This table reports the estimates of home, overlapping and non-overlapping fiscal year-end months as well as local firms year-ends. The dependent variable
in columns 1–3 is Spending Z; in the last three columns, it is Spending Binary. Panel A relies on the resource budget spending whilst panel B uses spending from
the capital budget. FE refer to each calendar month and overseas office-times-year fixed effects. The omitted reference category is spending during January. We
report a standard error in parenthesis below each coefficient. Standard errors allow for clustering at the country level. We denote significance using ∗p<0.1;
∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01.
(5) control for the EU membership show no statistically significant effect. This indicates that friction free access to the UK market
does not have a large impact on our benchmark results. Finally, the results in columns (3) and (6) demonstrate that in the capital
case larger distances mean a greater impact of the local fiscal year when that local fiscal year ends in March. This could reflect
greater difficulty in avoiding crowded-out local suppliers by trading with the UK.48
We also split the end of local fiscal year effect according to the income level of the host country in Table H.2. The income
level of the host country is potentially important. It might be expected that UK overseas offices would be able to source a greater
proportion of their office supplies locally in which case the local fiscal year may have a greater impact in richer countries. On the
other hand end of year spending may be a greater or a smaller phenomenon in poorer countries — to our knowledge no previous
studies have documented end of year spending in developing countries.49 Table H.2 shows that the UK overseas offices tend to spend
less on resource expenditure in low income countries. One explanation that would be consistent with this coefficient would be if
48 We note however that there are a small number of countries (notably including Japan and New Zealand) that are far away from the UK and with a fiscal
year ending in March. This coefficient could be substantially influenced by a small number of such countries.
49 To our knowledge the lowest income country in which year-end spending has been studied is our previous paper (Klymak and Baumann, 2022) using
Ukrainian data. Ukraine is accounted for as a lower middle income country.


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
25
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Table G.4
Fiscal year-end effects for capital and resource expenditures with start of local fiscal year.
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Z
Z
Z
Binary
Binary
Binary
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Resource Budget
Home FY End
1.371∗∗∗
1.395∗∗∗
1.343∗∗∗
0.493∗∗∗
0.497∗∗∗
0.479∗∗∗
(0.067)
(0.074)
(0.091)
(0.024)
(0.029)
(0.034)
LFY Start
−0.028
−0.026
−0.008
−0.014
(0.025)
(0.037)
(0.010)
(0.012)
LFY End × Home FY End
0.301∗∗∗
0.339∗∗∗
0.085∗∗
0.101∗
(0.102)
(0.126)
(0.040)
(0.051)
LFY End
−0.047
−0.088∗∗
−0.022
−0.040∗
(0.034)
(0.044)
(0.016)
(0.022)
Firms LFY End
0.138
0.096
0.060∗∗
0.051∗∗
(0.090)
(0.082)
(0.025)
(0.024)
Num Countries
180
68
68
180
68
68
Observations
39,996
23,796
23,796
39,996
23,796
23,796
R2
0.224
0.211
0.212
0.231
0.221
0.221
Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Overs. Office × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Panel B: Capital Budget
Home FY End
0.810∗∗∗
0.850∗∗∗
0.882∗∗∗
0.282∗∗∗
0.288∗∗∗
0.308∗∗∗
(0.054)
(0.066)
(0.065)
(0.020)
(0.023)
(0.023)
LFY Start
−0.003
0.010
0.024
0.003
0.017
(0.029)
(0.036)
(0.040)
(0.014)
(0.015)
LFY End × Home FY End
0.004
−0.089
−0.008
−0.037
(0.146)
(0.201)
(0.038)
(0.053)
LFY End
−0.046
−0.090∗∗
−0.024
−0.039∗
(0.031)
(0.042)
(0.015)
(0.022)
Firms LFY End
0.130∗∗
0.198∗∗∗
0.043
0.075
(0.050)
(0.068)
(0.036)
(0.046)
Num Countries
166
68
68
166
68
68
Observations
21,840
12,468
12,468
21,840
12,468
12,468
R2
0.158
0.165
0.166
0.305
0.309
0.309
Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Overs. Office × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Note: This table reports the estimates of home, overlapping and non-overlapping fiscal year-end months as well as local firms year-ends. The dependent variable
in columns 1–3 is Spending Z; in the last three columns, it is Spending Binary. Panel A relies on the resource budget spending whilst panel B uses spending from
the capital budget. FE refer to each calendar month and overseas office-times-year fixed effects. The omitted reference category is spending during January. We
report a standard error in parenthesis below each coefficient. Standard errors allow for clustering at the country level. We denote significance using ∗p<0.1;
∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01.
year-end spending is particularly acute in low income countries and that UK overseas offices source resource expenditure items but
not capital expenditure items locally. In the absence of any studies of year-end spending in low income countries however it is not
possible to have a large degree of confidence in any such explanation. This remains for future research.
Finally in Table H.3 we interact uncertainty (as measured by the World Uncertainty Index) and unemployment (using the average
unemployment rate in the preceding twelve months, sourced from Bloomberg terminal) with year-end spending. Unemployment
was potentially informative if it implied the private sector could better expand to meet heightened demand at the end of the fiscal
year without crowding out. Unemployment plays a key role in the precautionary savings explanation for year-end spending. If this
explanation is correct more local uncertainty would mean more precautionary savings on the part of the local government and
greater year-end spending. We might then expect more of a local fiscal year effect. We cannot find evidence for any such effects
however in Table H.3.
Notably, the coefficients for the home, local and home× local fiscal years are broadly consistent between Tables H.1–H.3 and
the benchmark in Table 1.
Finally as discussed in the main body of the paper, our dataset has some negative expenditure figures. These are relatively rare
with fewer than 3.5% of our spending values being negative. They are also relatively small with the sum of all positive expenditure
items in our dataset being £10,779,913,723 while the absolute value of the sum of all negative expenditure items is 18.2 times
smaller at £591,074,495. We perform a robustness check to ensure that these negative spending values are not driving our result,
however. In Table H.4 we reestimate the results of Table 1 after having dropped any office-budget-year where at least one monthly
spending figure has been recorded as negative. We get similar results as in the main paper.
Table H.5 splits resource expenditure into its two components of Departmental Expenditure Limit (DEL) and Annually Managed
Expenditure (AME). UK departments have their resource budgets allocated in one of these two systems (Treasury, 2013). DEL funds
are allocated in spending reviews that take place about once every three years. These are intended for expenses that can be planned
in advance such as staff salaries. AME funds are chosen annually and are intended for demand driven costs (such as welfare and
pensions).


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
26
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Table G.5
End of fiscal year spending effects with bootstrapped standard errors.
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Z
Z
Z
Binary
Binary
Binary
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Resource Budget
Home FY End
1.390∗∗∗
1.395∗∗∗
1.359∗∗∗
0.499∗∗∗
0.497∗∗∗
0.488∗∗∗
(0.031)
(0.039)
(0.041)
(0.012)
(0.015)
(0.016)
LFY End × Home FY End
0.300∗∗∗
0.335∗∗∗
0.085∗∗∗
0.099∗∗∗
(0.070)
(0.091)
(0.026)
(0.034)
LFY End
−0.047
−0.090∗∗
−0.022
−0.040∗∗
(0.029)
(0.038)
(0.014)
(0.019)
Firms LFY End
0.138∗∗∗
0.107∗∗∗
0.060∗∗∗
0.057∗∗
(0.035)
(0.039)
(0.022)
(0.024)
Num Countries
180
68
68
180
68
68
Observations
39,996
23,796
23,796
39,996
23,796
23,796
R2
0.224
0.211
0.212
0.231
0.221
0.221
Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Overs. Office × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Panel B: Capital Budget
Home FY End
0.812∗∗∗
0.844∗∗∗
0.867∗∗∗
0.280∗∗∗
0.288∗∗∗
0.298∗∗∗
(0.050)
(0.059)
(0.065)
(0.016)
(0.021)
(0.022)
LFY End × Home FY End
0.003
−0.085
−0.007
−0.034
(0.113)
(0.152)
(0.033)
(0.045)
LFY End
−0.046
−0.088∗∗
−0.024∗
−0.038∗∗
(0.032)
(0.038)
(0.013)
(0.018)
Firms LFY End
0.127∗∗
0.187∗∗∗
0.043
0.068∗
(0.054)
(0.058)
(0.036)
(0.038)
Num Countries
166
68
68
166
68
68
Observations
21,840
12,468
12,468
21,840
12,468
12,468
R2
0.158
0.165
0.166
0.305
0.309
0.309
Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Overs. Office × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Note: This table reports the estimates of home, overlapping and non-overlapping fiscal year-end months as well as local firms year-ends. The dependent variable
in columns 1–3 is Spending Z; in the last three columns, it is Spending Binary. Panel A relies on the resource budget spending whilst panel B uses spending from
the capital budget. FE refer to each calendar month and overseas office-times-year fixed effects. The omitted reference category is spending during January. We
report a standard error in parenthesis below each coefficient. Standard errors allow for bootstrapping. We denote significance using ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01.


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
27
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Table H.1
Extensions using Spending Z.
Resource
Resource
Resource
Resource
Capital
Capital
Capital
Capital
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Home FY End
1.370∗∗∗
1.397∗∗∗
1.390∗∗∗
1.394∗∗∗
0.836∗∗∗
0.810∗∗∗
0.812∗∗∗
0.811∗∗∗
(0.064)
(0.062)
(0.061)
(0.062)
(0.055)
(0.053)
(0.053)
(0.053)
LFY End × Home FY End
0.440∗
0.292∗∗∗
0.325∗
0.298∗∗∗
−0.507
−0.038
0.298
−0.160
(0.223)
(0.093)
(0.172)
(0.110)
(0.323)
(0.149)
(0.233)
(0.170)
LFY End
−0.264∗∗∗
−0.044
−0.042
−0.045
0.025
−0.044
−0.053
−0.047
(0.073)
(0.032)
(0.041)
(0.036)
(0.084)
(0.033)
(0.035)
(0.032)
LFY End × Home FY End × Log GDP Per Capita
−0.057
0.158
(0.080)
(0.117)
LFY End × Log GDP Per Capita
0.075∗∗∗
−0.027
(0.029)
(0.026)
LFY End × EU
0.0001
−0.018
(0.106)
(0.047)
LFY End × Home FY End × Commonwealth
−0.022
−0.484∗
(0.179)
(0.257)
LFY End × Commonwealth
−0.023
0.026
(0.065)
(0.054)
LFY End × Home FY End × Log Distance
0.006
0.240
(0.071)
(0.182)
LFY End × Log Distance
−0.011
−0.013
(0.034)
(0.021)
Num Countries
161
171
180
169
148
158
166
157
Observations
36,210
38,823
39,996
38,571
19,722
21,111
21,840
21,075
R2
0.218
0.224
0.224
0.224
0.160
0.157
0.159
0.158
Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Overs. Office × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Note: This table reports the estimates of home, overlapping and non-overlapping fiscal year-end months as well as local firms year-ends. We interact each
local fiscal year-end variable with the logarithm of GDP per capita, the logarithm of the distance between the UK and the overseas office country and the
overseas office is based in the EU as well as whether the overseas office is the commonwealth country. The dependent variable in all columns is Spending Z.
Columns (1)–(4) rely on the resource budget spending while columns (5)–(8) use spending from the capital budget. FE refer to each calendar month and overseas
office-times-year fixed effects. The omitted reference category is spending during January. We report a standard error in parenthesis below each coefficient.
Standard errors allow for clustering at the country level. We denote significance using ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01.
Table H.2
Fiscal year-end effects for capital and resource expenditures by income.
Resource expenditure
Capital expenditure
(1)
(2)
Home FY End
1.393∗∗∗
0.818∗∗∗
(0.062)
(0.053)
Low income × LFY End
−0.235∗∗∗
0.037
(0.058)
(0.087)
Lower middle income × LFY End
−0.107∗∗
−0.119∗
(0.053)
(0.067)
Upper middle income × LFY End
0.017
−0.062
(0.056)
(0.052)
High income × LFY End
−0.006
−0.041
(0.060)
(0.042)
LFY End × Home FY End
0.267∗∗∗
0.034
(0.102)
(0.149)
Num Countries
168
155
Observations
38,280
20,940
R2
0.223
0.158
Month FE
Yes
Yes
Overs. Office × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Note: ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01. This table reports the estimates of home and local fiscal year-end months. The dependent variable in (1) and (2) columns is
Spending Z. The first specification relies on the resource budget spending whilst the second relies on spending from the capital budget. FE refer to each calendar
month and overseas office-times-year fixed effects. The omitted category is spending during January. We report a standard error in parenthesis below each
coefficient. Standard errors allow for clustering at the country level. We denote significance using ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01.


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
28
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Table H.3
Uncertainty, unemployment and the end of the fiscal year.
Resource
Resource
Capital
Capital
expenditure
expenditure
expenditure
expenditure
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Home FY End
1.375∗∗∗
1.352∗∗∗
0.826∗∗∗
0.832∗∗∗
(0.066)
(0.087)
(0.057)
(0.082)
LFY End
−0.024
−0.003
−0.094∗∗
0.031
(0.045)
(0.088)
(0.039)
(0.068)
LFY End ×
Home FY End
0.313∗∗∗
0.503∗∗
0.042
0.191
(0.102)
(0.195)
(0.170)
(0.226)
WUI Uncertainty
0.055
−0.035
(0.052)
(0.056)
Unemployment
0.012
0.0003
(0.011)
(0.013)
LFY End ×
WUI Uncertainty
−0.199
0.224∗
(0.139)
(0.130)
LFY End ×
Unemployment
−0.012
−0.008
(0.011)
(0.008)
Num Countries
129
64
125
64
Observations
33,696
19,578
18,576
9805
R2
0.218
0.217
0.162
0.185
Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Overs. Office × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Note: This table interacts with the local end of fiscal year effect with uncertainty (as measured by the World Uncertainty Index) and unemployment (average
unemployment in preceding 12 months as reported in Bloomberg Terminal). The dependent variable in each column is Spending Z for Resource and Capital
Expenditure. FE refer to each calendar month and overseas office-times-year fixed effects. The omitted reference category for the monthly fixed effects is spending
during January. We report a standard error in parenthesis below each coefficient. Standard errors are clustered at a country level. We denote significance using
∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01.


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
29
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Table H.4
End of fiscal year spending effects excluding negative values.
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Z
Z
Z
Binary
Binary
Binary
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Resource Budget
Home FY End
1.500∗∗∗
1.490∗∗∗
1.471∗∗∗
0.530∗∗∗
0.530∗∗∗
0.522∗∗∗
(0.066)
(0.085)
(0.094)
(0.025)
(0.033)
(0.037)
LFY End × Home FY End
0.226∗∗
0.212
0.091∗∗
0.085
(0.109)
(0.149)
(0.040)
(0.056)
LFY End
−0.043
−0.104∗∗
−0.019
−0.043∗
(0.035)
(0.047)
(0.017)
(0.023)
Firms LFY End
0.121
0.123
0.069∗∗
0.071∗∗
(0.092)
(0.089)
(0.030)
(0.028)
Num Countries
180
68
68
180
68
68
Observations
31,899
19,368
19,368
31,899
19,368
19,368
R2
0.273
0.255
0.255
0.244
0.231
0.231
Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Overs. Office × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Panel B: Capital Budget
Home FY End
0.869∗∗∗
0.896∗∗∗
0.924∗∗∗
0.287∗∗∗
0.300∗∗∗
0.309∗∗∗
(0.063)
(0.074)
(0.079)
(0.022)
(0.024)
(0.028)
LFY End × Home FY End
0.023
−0.163
0.017
−0.038
(0.153)
(0.161)
(0.048)
(0.053)
LFY End
−0.021
−0.043
−0.024
−0.037∗
(0.040)
(0.045)
(0.018)
(0.020)
Firms LFY End
0.145∗∗
0.202∗∗
0.072
0.098∗∗
(0.065)
(0.080)
(0.050)
(0.049)
Num Countries
166
68
68
166
68
68
Observations
12,111
6642
6642
12,111
6642
6642
R2
0.197
0.205
0.206
0.306
0.312
0.313
Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Overs. Office × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Note: This table reports the estimates of home, overlapping and non-overlapping fiscal year-end months as well as local firms year-ends. The dependent variable
in columns 1–3 is Spending Z; in the last three columns, it is Spending Binary. Panel A relies on the resource budget spending whilst panel B uses spending from
the capital budget. FE refer to each calendar month and overseas office-times-year fixed effects. The omitted reference category is spending during January.
The sample excludes office-budget-year where at least one monthly spending figure has been negative. We report a standard error in parenthesis below each
coefficient. Standard errors allow for clustering at the country level. We denote significance using ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01.


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
30
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Table H.5
End of fiscal year effect for resource spending by type.
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Z
Z
Z
Binary
Binary
Binary
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Resource AME Budget
Home FY End
0.132∗∗
0.091
0.055
0.075∗∗∗
0.053∗∗
0.045∗
(0.062)
(0.076)
(0.079)
(0.020)
(0.024)
(0.026)
LFY End × Home FY End
0.231∗
0.249∗
0.042
0.053
(0.121)
(0.134)
(0.043)
(0.045)
LFY End
0.024
0.034
0.004
0.004
(0.044)
(0.063)
(0.016)
(0.022)
Firms LFY End
−0.031
−0.098
0.013
0.0001
(0.055)
(0.063)
(0.020)
(0.021)
Num Countries
163
68
68
163
68
68
Observations
20,964
11,520
11,520
20,964
11,520
11,520
R2
0.074
0.072
0.072
0.457
0.456
0.456
Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Overs. Office × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Panel B: Resource DEL Budget
Home FY End
1.468∗∗∗
1.471∗∗∗
1.441∗∗∗
0.518∗∗∗
0.521∗∗∗
0.514∗∗∗
(0.067)
(0.078)
(0.087)
(0.025)
(0.030)
(0.033)
LFY End × Home FY End
0.276∗∗
0.297∗∗
0.074∗
0.082
(0.107)
(0.132)
(0.042)
(0.054)
LFY End
−0.036
−0.098∗
−0.018
−0.041∗
(0.032)
(0.049)
(0.017)
(0.025)
Firms LFY End
0.157∗
0.137∗
0.063∗∗
0.064∗∗
(0.083)
(0.073)
(0.029)
(0.027)
Num Countries
180
68
68
180
68
68
Observations
39,996
23,796
23,796
39,996
23,796
23,796
R2
0.239
0.227
0.228
0.225
0.217
0.217
Month FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Overs. Office × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Note: This table reports the estimates of home, overlapping and non-overlapping fiscal year-end months as well as local firms year-ends. The dependent variable
in columns 1–3 is Spending Z; in the last three columns, it is Spending Binary. Panel A relies on the resource AME budget spending whilst panel B uses spending
from the resource DEL budget. FE refer to each calendar month and overseas office-times-year fixed effects. The omitted reference category is spending during
January. We report a standard error in parenthesis below each coefficient. Standard errors allow for clustering at the country level. We denote significance using
∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01.


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
31
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
Table H.6
End of fiscal year spending effects with alternative fixed effects.
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Spending
Z
Z
Z
Binary
Binary
Binary
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Resource Budget
Home FY End
1.526∗∗∗
1.255∗∗∗
1.216∗∗∗
0.508∗∗∗
0.458∗∗∗
0.448∗∗∗
(0.362)
(0.235)
(0.223)
(0.135)
(0.077)
(0.079)
LFY End × Home FY End
0.296∗∗∗
0.336∗∗∗
0.085∗∗∗
0.099∗∗∗
(0.070)
(0.091)
(0.026)
(0.034)
LFY End
−0.043
−0.089∗∗
−0.021
−0.040∗∗
(0.028)
(0.037)
(0.014)
(0.018)
Firms LFY End
0.143∗∗∗
0.111∗∗∗
0.061∗∗∗
0.058∗∗
(0.035)
(0.039)
(0.022)
(0.024)
Num Countries
180
68
68
180
68
68
Observations
39,996
23,796
23,796
40,140
23,832
23,832
R2
0.239
0.230
0.231
0.244
0.236
0.236
Month × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Overs. Office × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Panel B: Capital Budget
Home FY End
0.735∗∗∗
0.926∗∗∗
1.161∗∗∗
0.252∗∗∗
0.230∗∗
0.207∗
(0.323)
(0.331)
(0.315)
(0.095)
(0.116)
(0.109)
LFY End × Home FY End
−0.005
−0.090
−0.010
−0.029
(0.112)
(0.151)
(0.033)
(0.045)
LFY End
−0.043
−0.084∗∗
−0.023∗
−0.034∗
(0.032)
(0.038)
(0.013)
(0.018)
Firms LFY End
0.135∗∗
0.194∗∗∗
0.032
0.055
(0.054)
(0.057)
(0.036)
(0.038)
Num Countries
166
68
68
166
68
68
Observations
21,840
12,468
12,468
23,652
13,356
13,356
R2
0.169
0.182
0.183
0.318
0.326
0.326
Month × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Overs. Office × Year FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Note: ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01. This table reports the estimates of home, overlapping and non-overlapping fiscal year-end months. The dependent variable
in (1) and (2) columns is Spending Z; in columns (3) and (4), it is Spending Binary. The first two specifications rely on the resource budget spending whilst the
latter two use spending from the capital budget. FE refer to each calendar month and overseas office-times-year fixed effects. The omitted category is spending
during January. We report a standard error in parenthesis below each coefficient. Standard errors are bootstrapped (Note that errors clustered on a country level
are available on request — they are generally smaller than these bootstrapped errors). We denote significance using ∗p<0.1; ∗∗p<0.05; ∗∗∗p<0.01.


European Economic Review 168 (2024) 104803
32
S. Baumann and M. Klymak
The UK government prefers DEL spending to AME funding and all expenditure items are in DEL unless the chief secretary to the
treasury has decided the spending item is highly stochastic in nature and should instead be AME (Treasury, 2023, 1.47). The UK
Foreign and Commonwealth office receives little AME funding. Collectively the overseas office over the period received 91.4% of
their funds via DEL, 1.4% via AME with the remaining 7.2% from Capital.
The results are broadly similar with the largest difference betting that the Firms LFY End coefficients are not significant in the
AME case but are more significant in the DEL case. As a result of this similarity and the small scale of AME funding we decided to
simplify the analysis in the main paper and add both forms of resource spending.
As a final robustness check we repeat the benchmark specifications of Table 1 but with a separate fixed effect for each month-year
combination (the benchmark specification uses one dummy for each month but the same December dummy would be used for all
years in the sample). This means that the fixed effect removes one-off shocks for the data in addition to removing annual seasonality.
It comes at the cost of the UK FY End variable in the regression however.50 The result can be seen in Table H.6.
References
Baicker, Katherine, 2005. The spillover effects of state spending. J. Public Econ. 89 (2–3), 529–544.
Bartov, Eli, 1993. The timing of asset sales and earnings manipulation. Account. Rev. 840–855.
Baumann, Stuart, 2019. Putting it off for later: Procrastination and end-of-fiscal-year spending spikes. Scand. J. Econ. 121 (2), 706–735.
Besley, Timothy, Case, Anne, 1995. Does electoral accountability affect economic policy choices? Evidence from gubernatorial term limits. Q. J. Econ. 110 (3),
769–798.
Case, Anne C., Rosen, Harvey S., Hines, Jr., James R., 1993. Budget spillovers and fiscal policy interdependence: Evidence from the states. J. Public Econ. 52
(3), 285–307.
Conte, Maddalena, Cotterlaz, Pierre, Mayer, Thierry, 2022. The CEPII gravity database. CEPII Working Paper N 2022-05.
Crawford, Rowena, Emmerson, Carl, Tetlow, Gemma, 2009. A survey of public spending in the UK. Institute for Fiscal Studies, Briefing Note BN43, 272–290.
Décaire, Paul, Sosyura, Denis, 2022. On a spending spree: The real effects of heuristics in managerial budgets. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
id=4242936.
Devereux, Michael P., Lockwood, Ben, Redoano, Michela, 2008. Do countries compete over corporate tax rates? J. Public Econ. 92 (5–6), 1210–1235.
Eichenauer, Vera, 2020. December fever in public finance, 470. KOF Working Papers, ETH Zurich.
Frankel, Richard, Levy, Hagit, Shalev, Ron, 2017. Factors associated with the year-end decline in working capital. Manage. Sci. 63 (2), 438–458.
Hyndman, Noel, Jones, Rowan, Pendlebury, Maurice, 2007. An exploratory study of annuality in the UK public sector: Plus CA change, plus c’est meme
chose? Financ. Account. Manag. 23 (2), 215–237.
International Monetary Fund, 2016. Blog post: The timing of the government’s fiscal year. https://blog-pfm.imf.org/en/pfmblog/2016/10/the-timing-of-the-
governments-fiscal-year.
Kinney, Michael, Trezevant, Robert H., 1993. Taxes and the timing of corporate capital expenditures. J. Am. Tax. Assoc. 15 (2).
Klymak, Margaryta, Baumann, Stuart, 2022. Paying over the odds at the end of the fiscal year. Evidence from Ukraine. Department of Economics Discussion
Paper Series, University of Oxford.
Laibson, David, 1997. ‘‘Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting’’. Q. J. Econ. 112 (2), 443–477.
Liebman, Jeffrey, Mahoney, Neale, 2017. Do expiring budgets lead to wasteful year-end spending? Evidence from federal procurement. Amer. Econ. Rev. 107
(11), 3510–3549.
Lowy Institute, 2019. Global diplomacy index - 2019 country ranking. https://globaldiplomacyindex.lowyinstitute.org/country_rank.html.
OpenTheBooks.com, 2019. The federal government’s use it or lose it spending spree. https://www.openthebooks.com/assets/1/7/UseItOrLoseIt_Final1.PDF.
Oyer, Paul, 1998. Fiscal year ends and nonlinear incentive contracts: The effect on business seasonality. Q. J. Econ. 113 (1), 149–185.
Parchet, Raphaël, 2019. Are local tax rates strategic complements or strategic substitutes? Am. Econ. J.: Econ. Policy 11 (2), 189–224.
Price Waterhouse Coopers, 2023. Changing fiscal year end considerations. https://www.pwc.com/us/en/services/consulting/deals/accounting-advisory/changing-
fiscal-year-end-considerations.html.
Roychowdhury, Sugata, 2006. Earnings management through real activities manipulation. J. Account. Econ. 42 (3), 335–370.
Shin, Hyun-Han, Kim, Yong H., 2002. Agency costs and efficiency of business capital investment: Evidence from quarterly capital expenditures. J. Corporate
Finance 8 (2), 139–158.
Treasury, H.M., 2013. How to understand public sector spending. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/how-to-understand-public-sector-spending/how-
to-understand-public-sector-spending#departmental-expenditure-limits-del.
Treasury, H.M., 2023. Consolidated budgeting guidance: 2022-23. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/1061788/CBG_2022-23.pdf.
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2011. Amendment No. 4 to form S-1 registration statement under the securities act of 1933 ADS Tactical, Inc.
https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1496129/000095012311066062/y03683a4sv1za.htm.
50 This is because rather than having one coefficient for March we have a separate coefficient for each years march. For brevity we have not reported these.
